
RE COM M ENDED NUTRIENT INTAKES 
for MALAY SIA 
R NI 
A Re portofthe TechnicalWo rking
Group on Nu tritionalGu idelines 
Na tionalCoordinating Committee on Food and Nutrition 
MinistryofH ealthMa laysia 
Ministry ofHe althMalaysia 
ii Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
ISBN: 978-967- 12050-4-4 
© 2017 
Na tionalCoordinatingCommittee on Food and Nutrition(NCC FN) 
M inistry ofHealthMalaysia 
Allrightsreserved.Reproduction and dissemination ofm aterialinthisbook foreducationalorother 
non-commercialpurposesareauthorizedw ithoutany priorwritten permissionfrom thecopyright 
holdersprovidedthesourceis fullyacknowledged.Reproduction ofma terialin thisinformation 
productfor resaleor other comm ercialpurpose is prohibited w ithoutwritten permissionofthe 
copyrightholders.Applicationsforsuch permissionshouldbe addressedtobe Chairman, National 
Co ordinatingCommittee on Food and N utrition(NCCFN). 
Secretariat: 
TechnicalWorkingGroup on N utritionalGuidelines 
c/o:N utritionD ivision, 
Level1, BlockE3,Complex E,
Precint1, FederalGovernme ntAdministrationOffice, 
62590 Putrajaya,M alaysia.
Tel:03-8892 4460 •Fax: 03-8892 4511 
Website:http://nutrition.moh.gov.my 
De signedby:ImutiaraSolution 
Printedby:SelectKami Resources 
iii Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Contents 
v
vi 
vii 
viii 
xi 
xii-xiii 
xii 
xiii 
xiv 
xv 
1
14 
15 
46 
72 
100 
122 
123 
136 
148 
160 
174 
190 
206 
218 
236 
252 
FFoorreewwoorrdd MMiinniisstteerr ooff HHeeaalltthh MMaallaayyssiiaa
FFoorreewwoorrdd DDiirreeccttoorr GGeenneerraall ooff HHeeaalltthh MMaallaayyssiiaa
FFoorreewwoorrdd DDeeppuuttyy DDiirreeccttoorr GGeenneerraall ooff HHeeaalltthh ((PPuubblliicc HHeeaalltthh)) MMaallaayyssiiaa
PPrreeffaaccee CChhaaiirrmmaann ooff TTeecchhnniiccaall WWoorrkkiinngg GGrroouupp ((TTWWGG)) NNuuttrriittiioonnaall GGuuiiddeelliinneess
LLiisstt ooff TTeecchhnniiccaall WWoorrkkiinngg GGrroouupp ((TTWWGG)) NNuuttrriittiioonnaall GGuuiiddeelliinneess MMeemmbbeerrss
TTeecchhnniiccaall SSuubb CCoommmmiitttteeee ffoorr RReeccoommmmeennddeedd NNuuttrriieenntt IInnttaakkee ((RRNNII)) 22001177
EEnneerrggyy aanndd MMaaccrroonnuuttrriieennttss
VViittaammiinnss
MMiinneerraallss aanndd TTrraaccee EElleemmeennttss
LLiisstt ooff EEddiittoorrss aanndd CCoonnttrriibbuuttoorrss ttoo CChhaapptteerrss
IInnttrroodduuccttiioonn ttoo RRNNII 22001177
SSuummmmaarryy ooff EEnneerrggyy && MMaaccrroonnuuttrriieennttss
CChhaapptteerr 11:: EEnneerrggyy
CChhaapptteerr 22:: PPrrootteeiinn
CChhaapptteerr 33:: FFaatt
CChhaapptteerr 44:: CCaarrbboohhyyddrraattee
SSuummmmaarryy ooff VViittaammiinnss
CChhaapptteerr 55:: TThhiiaammiinn ((VViittaammiinn BB11)) 
CChhaapptteerr 66:: RRiibbooﬂﬂaavviinn ((VViittaammiinn BB22))
CChhaapptteerr 77:: NNiiaacciinn ((VViittaammiinn BB33)) 
CChhaapptteerr 88:: PPaannttootthheenniicc AAcciidd ((VViittaammiinn BB55)) 
CChhaapptteerr 99:: PPyyrriiddooxxiinnee ((VViittaammiinn BB66)) 
CChhaapptteerr 1100:: FFoollaattee ((VViittaammiinn BB99)) 
CChhaapptteerr 1111:: CCoobbaallaammiinn ((VViittaammiinn BB1122)) 
CChhaapptteerr 1122:: AAssccoorrbbiicc AAcciidd ((VViittaammiinn CC))
CChhaapptteerr 1133:: VViittaammiinn AA 
CChhaapptteerr 1144:: VViittaammiinn DD 
iv Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
CChhaapptteerr 1155:: VViittaammiinn EE
CChhaapptteerr 1166:: VViittaammiinn KK
SSuummmmaarryy ooff MMiinneerraallss && TTrraaccee EElleemmeennttss
CChhaapptteerr 1177:: CCaallcciiuumm
CChhaapptteerr 1188:: IIrroonn
CChhaapptteerr 1199:: IIooddiinnee
CChhaapptteerr 2200:: ZZiinncc
CChhaapptteerr 2211:: SSeelleenniiuumm
CChhaapptteerr 2222:: PPhhoosspphhoorruuss
CChhaapptteerr 2233:: SSooddiiuumm
CChhaapptteerr 2244:: PPoottaassssiiuumm
CChhaapptteerr 2255:: MMaaggnneessiiuumm
CChhaapptteerr 2266:: CChhrroommiiuumm
CChhaapptteerr 2277:: CCooppppeerr
CChhaapptteerr 2288:: MMaannggaanneessee
CChhaapptteerr 2299:: MMoollyybbddeennuumm
CChhaapptteerr 3300:: FFlloouurriiddee
CCoonnsseennssuuss WWoorrkksshhoopp RRNNII 22001177 -- PPaarrttiicciippaannttss
AAcckknnoowwlleeddggeemmeennttss
RRNNII 22001177 SSuummmmaarryy TTaabblleess
EEnneerrggyy
VViittaammiinnss
MMiinneerraallss aanndd TTrraaccee EElleemmeennttss PPaarrtt 11 
MMiinneerraallss aanndd TTrraaccee EElleemmeennttss PPaarrtt 22
270 
286 
300 
301 
320 
342 
356 
374 
390 
410 
428 
440 
454 
465 
478 
492 
502 
516 
518 
519 
520 
521 
522 
523 
vRecommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Foreword 
Malaysia still faces the double burden of m alnutrition. The burden of N CD s 
continue to rise in Malaysia and unhealthy diet is one of the major risk factors for 
NC D. Malaysian nowadays are living in an obesogenic environmen t that leads to 
sedentary lifestyle and unhealthy eating habits.  
The Ministry of Hea lth M alaysia strives to assist Malaysians in achieving, 
sustaining and maintaining a certain level of health status and to facilitate them 
in leading a productive lifestyle. This can be better m aterialised by providing and 
strengthening the health promotion and preventive approaches. Prevention of 
diet-related diseases relies upon a comprehensive approach which includes a 
com bination of targeted nutrition intervention programme s and a wide range of 
nutrition education for the public. Thus, the R ecom men ded Nutrient Intakes 
(RN I) are crucial to these efforts as they form the basis in setting up or 
establishing nutrition requirement in any nutritional guidelines. 
Thus, I would also like to commend the Technical Working Group (TW G) on 
Nutritional Guidelines established under the National Coordinating Committee 
on Food and Nutrition (NCCFN) for their diligent efforts in successfully updating 
and revising the RNI (2005) edition. 
It is my fervent hope that all the relevant ministries and agencies, academia, 
health-related professional organisations and industries will use the RNI 2017 
accordingly in their planning, monitoring and evaluation of nutrition programme s 
and policies. 
YB Datuk Seri Dr. S Subraman iam 
Minister of Health Malaysia 
Minister of Health Malaysia 
vi Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
One of the major challenges in evidence-informed policy making is the lack of 
timely and comprehensive data needed by the relevant policy makers. W ith 
lim ited resources at various levels, activities need to be prioritised that would 
bring the greatest impact on the quality of health and nutrition of the nation. 
The need to assess energy and nutrient requirement is a never-ending task, given 
that Malaysia has experienced major transition in disease patterns due to rapid 
changes in lifestyle and social demography. In this regard, the revised edition of 
the RNI (2017 ) for Malaysia plays an important role in providing updated 
scientific knowledge and practices on the recomme nded nutrient intake for 
Ma laysian. This RNI is developed through commendable efforts from experts of 
various ministries, universities, agencies, institutions and professional 
organisations. 
I wish to congratulate the Technical Working Group on Nutritional Guidelines 
and the various sub-committees who have assisted in producing this document. 
I am  confident that this revised RNI will be a valuable docume nt for all of us. 
YBhg. Datuk Dr Noor Hisham Bin Abdullah 
Director General of Health Malaysia 
Director General of Health Malaysia 
Foreword 
vii Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Revising R NI  is one of the main activities under the Facilitating Strategy in 
National Plan of Action for Nutrition of Malaysia (NPANM) III, 2016 – 2025, 
which is to provide standard nutrition guidelines for various target groups. 
Recommen ded Nutrient Intakes (RN I) are the level of intake of essential nutrients 
that, on the basis of scientific knowledge, are judged to meet the known nutrient 
needs of practically all healthy person. The revision of RNI 2005, will provide 
latest recomm endation on dietary intake for the maintenance of good health. With 
close collaboration and valuable inputs by experts from  various agencies and 
organizations in the country, the revision has been done based on the latest 
available evidence and finally agreed upon in a Consensus Meeting. 
As  Ch airman of the National Coordinating C om m ittee on Food and Nutrition 
(NCCFN ), I wo uld like to thank the Technical Working Group on Nutritional 
Guidelines and its three sub-commi ttees for their great effort in updating and 
revising the RNI 2005. 
It is my hope that this revised RNI 2017 would be greatly beneficial in helping 
to address malnutrition and other diet-related diseases by all the relevant 
stakeholders. It will also be a valuable source of reference for future nutrition 
guidelines. 
YBhg Datuk Dr. Lokm an Hakim Bin Sulaiman 
Deputy Director General of Health (Public Health) 
Ministry of Health Malaysia 
Deputy Director General of Health 
(Public Health) Malaysia 
Foreword 
viii Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
The need for a guide to serve as a goal for good nutrition has long been well recognized. 
Recomme nded Nutrients Intakes (RNIs) are nutrient standards that may be used to plan and 
assess dietary nutrient intakes. The first edition of the Recommended Nutrient Intakes (RNI) 
Ma laysia was published by the NCCFN (2005). The TWG Nutritional Guidelines under the 
auspices of the National Coordinating Com mittee on Food and Nutrition (NCCFN) proposed 
a revision of RNI (2005) in 2015. The Technical Working G roup maintained the three Technical 
Sub Committees (TSC) of RNI 2005, namely, Energy and M acronutrients, Vitamins, and 
Minerals and Trace Elements, and its activities were presented to and endorsed by the NCCFN 
on 9 May 2016. 
The Technical Working Group had agreed on the common approach towards deciding on the 
values to be adopted and the format of presenting the Ma laysian RN I 2017. A total of 49 writers 
from the three TSCs were involved in the review exercise and the draft were presented in a 
Consensus Workshop on 10-11 January 2017 attended by 82 participants from 25 stakeholders, 
namely, MOH (5 ), Academia (10), Research Institutes (4), Professional Organizations (3), 
Federation of Malaysian Manufacturers (FMM), Federation of M alaysian Consum ers 
As sociations (FOM CA) and Prime Minister’s department. This final documen t takes into 
consideration all comments and suggestions to improve each chapter and will now replace the 
RNI  (2005) as the main reference for the Recommended Nutrient Intakes for Malaysia. 
The following sections highlight the TSC recomme ndations for the four main chapters of the 
document presenting what is new and also the differences between RN I (2005) and the revised 
edition (RN I, 2017), the details of which could be found in the respective section. 
Introduction 
• The nutrient recommenda tions have taken into consideration relevant publications after 2005. 
The nome nclature and interpretation largely remain unchanged with the exception of Figure 
1.3 adopted from FAO/W HO/UNU (2004) and Figure 1.4 IOM (2005). 
• All age groups remain similar as RNI (2005) except for infant, which was divided into four 
quarterly groups. 
• Reference heights for various age groups were derived from the National Health Morbidity 
Survey (IKU, 2015) 
• R eference weight for children 0-9 years were based on weight-for-age median (WHO, 2006), 
adolescents 10-18 years BMI-for-age median (WHO,  2007), while for adults 19 years and 
above, was derived as mass equivalent to (desired) BMI 22.0 based on NHMS 2015 median 
height. 
• R NI (2017) recommended 13 new nutrients, making a total of 30 nutrients as compared to the 
17 nutrients in RNI (2005). 
Preface 
ix Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
En ergy and Macronutrients Recom men dations 
• The proposed recomme ndation for energy maintained the factorial method of the 
FAO/ WHO/UNU (2004)  report. 
• Energy values were proposed for four levels of physical activity, name ly low active (PAL 1.4), 
m oderately active (PAL 1.6), active (PAL 1.8) and very active (PA L 2.0). Energy 
recommendation for individuals should be based on their physical activity level, but for 
population groups, the recomme ndation of PAL 1.6 can be adopted. 
• Four recommenda tions of energy for infants were made for each 3-monthly age group as 
com pared to RNI (2005). 
• Energy recommendations are now proposed for the first trimester of pregnancy, and not just the 
second and third trimesters. 
• The revision for protein was done based on recent consensus statements that suggested protein 
intake should be between 1.0 and 1.5 g/kg/day. 
• Overall, the protein recommenda tions for infants and children are lower than the previous RNI 
2005 due to a technical error in the FAO/WHO/UNU (1985) report. 
• Protein recommen dation for pregnancy was also revised based on a slightly higher total 
gestational weight gain and is available for the second and third trimesters. 
• There are no specific recomme ndations for fats and carbohydrates but only as a percentage of 
contributions towards total daily energy intake (TEI).  
• The TSC  reviewed current evidence and recommends that macronutrient contribution towards 
TEI for Malaysian adults should be as follows: carbohydrates 50 - 65% TEI, fat 25 - 30%  TEI, 
and protein 10 - 20%TEI. 
Vitamins Recomm endations 
• Recognizing the continued relevance, all eight vitamins in R N I (2005) were reviewed and 
retained except for vitamin D, the TSC decided to retain the original values, i.e. adapting the 
values from WHO/FAO ( 2004). 
• For vitamin D, the TSC  decided to adapt the values from IOM (2011) in view  of several recent 
reports on the unsatisfactory status of this vitamin among some population groups. These new 
values on vitamin D are generally 2-3 times higher than the 2005 values. 
• For three of the four new vitamins, the TSC felt that the WHO/F AO  (2004) values recomme nded 
for vitam in K, pyridoxine and pantothenic acid are appropriate to be adapted for use in RNI 
(2017). 
• For vitamin B12, the TSC  adapted the EFSA (2015) values derived mainly based on appropriate 
biom arkers. These values are higher for all age groups compared with the WHO/F AO (2004) 
and IOM  1998 values which were based on dietary intake levels. Although FAO/WHO did not 
have a revised R NI in recent years, the TSC decided that the RNI (2004) of these organizations 
rem ained as the main source of reference. 
• Publications of the Institute of Medicine (IOM) and the European Food Safety Authority 
(EFSA) were also used in this update. 
Preface 
x Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Min erals and trace elements Recomme ndations 
• The Technical Sub-Comm ittee (TSC) on Minerals and Trace Elements agreed to adopt the 
recom m endations of FAO/WHO a s a priority. 
• H owever, for minerals and trace elemen ts that the FAO /WHO  did not have available guidelines, 
the recommendations of IOM were used instead.  
• A fter reviewing recent dietary intake recomme ndations of FAO /W HO , IOM and ESFA, as well 
as those of countries in the region, the TSC made the decision to include besides calcium (RNI, 
2005), four other minerals namely, phosphorus, sodium, potassium and m agnesium for the 
(RNI , 2017) 
• From the nine trace elements, four (iron, iodine, zinc and selenium, RNI  2005) were retained 
and five new elements, chromium, copper, manganese, molybdenum  and fluoride were included 
using the most recent recomme ndations of IOM (various years), ESFA (2010), Australia (2006), 
Japan (2015) and the Philippines (2015). 
Revision of RNI is an ongoing activity and nutrient recomme ndations will continue to evolve 
and be updated as new research findings using new methods of analysis are reported. These 
recom men dations (RNI, 2017), part of an effort to update the original RNI (2005) are for healthy 
people and may not meet the specific nutritional requirements of individuals with various 
diseases or conditions, pre-term infants, or people with specific genetic profiles. 
The TWG  are confident that RN I (2017) would be the main source of reference to the 
Governm ent to better plan, evaluate and monitor nutrition programmes, to assist public health 
nutritionists and other health related professionals in assessing the dietary requirements of 
individuals and groups and to help food legislators and the food industry for dietary modelling 
and/or food labelling and food formulation. 
I wish to extend my personal gratitude to the membe rs of the TWG for their continued support, 
the C hairmen and membe rs of the various Technical Sub-Co m m ittees (TSCs) for their 
contribution in reviewing and updating the RNI (2005), the Consensus Workshop participants 
for their constructive comme nts and suggestions to further imp rove this document and the 
Secretariat (Nutrition Division, MOH) for their assistance to complete the task. 
Emer itus Professor Dr. Mohd Ismail Noor 
F ASc, FIUNS, FNSM 
Chairman 
Technical Working Group on Nutritional Guidelines 
National Coordinating Committee for Food and Nutrition (NCCFN) 
Preface 
xi Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Technical Work ing Group On Nu tritional Guidelines 
Em eritus Professor Dr. Mohd Ismail Noor - Ch airman 
Taylor’s University 
M s Gui Shir Ley - Secretary 
N utrition Division, 
Ministry of Health Malaysia 
Puan Zaitun Hj Daud 
N utrition Division, 
Ministry of Health Malaysia 
D r. Faridah Abu Bakar 
Family Health Development Division 
Ministry of Health Malaysia 
D r. A’aishah bt Senin 
D isease Control Division 
Ministry of Health Malaysia 
Puan Norhidayah Othman 
Food Safety and Quality Division 
Ministry of Health Malaysia 
C ik Ruffina Dalis Jimen 
H ealth Education & Communication Centre, 
Ministry of Health Malaysia 
M s Jamilah Ahmad 
Me laka State Health Department, 
Ministry of Health 
Professor Dr. Poh Bee Koon 
U niversiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
Associate Professor Dr. Hamid Jan Jan 
Moham ed 
Universiti Sains Malaysia 
Associate Professor Dr. Chan Yoke Mun 
Universiti Putra Malaysia 
Dr. Yasmin Ooi Beng Houi 
Universiti Malaysia Sabah 
Dr. Mahenderan Ap pukutty 
Universiti Teknologi M AR A 
Dr. Tan Sue Yee 
International Medical University 
Dr. Tee E Siong 
Nutrition Society of Malaysia 
Dr. Zaitun Md Yassin 
Nutrition Society of Malaysia 
Professor Dr Winnie Chee Siew Swee 
Ma laysian Dietitians’ As sociation (MDA) 
xii Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
RNI M alaysia 2017 Technical Sub Com mittees 
Energy and Macronutrients 
Professor Poh Bee Koon (UKM) - Chairperson 
Emeritus Professor Dr. Mohd Ismail Noor (Taylor’s University) 
Professor Dr. Wan Abdul Manan Wan Muda (USM) 
Professor Dr. Tilakavati Karupaiah (UKM) 
Professor Dr. Ruzita Abd Talib (UKM ) 
Associate Professor Dr. Mohd Nasir Mohd Taib (UPM) 
A ssociate Professor Dr. Sokhini A M utalib (UPM) 
A ssociate Professor Dr. Nik Shanita Safii (UKM) 
As sociate Professor Dr. Hazizi Abu Saad (UPM) 
As sociate Professor Datin Dr. Safiah Mohd Yusof (IMU) 
Dr. Chin Yit Siew (UPM ) 
Dr. Tan Sue Yee (IMU) 
Dr. Mohd Razif Shahril (UniSZA) 
Dr. Chuah Khun Aik (UKM ) 
Ms . Jamilah Ahm ad (MOH) 
M s. Khairul Zarina Mohd Yusop (MOH) 
Mr. Rosli Mohd Sali (HKL) 
M s. Nur Amalina Muhamad (MOH)  
M s. Nurul Az nyda Norizan (IM R) 
xiii Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
RN I Ma laysia 2017 Technical Sub Com mittees 
Vitamins 
Dr. Tee E Siong (NSM) - C hairperson 
Professor Dr. Norimah A. Karim (UKM ) 
Professor Dr. Suzana Shahar (UKM ) 
Professor Dr. Amin Ismail (UPM ) 
As sociate Professor Dr. Hamid Jan Jan Mohamed (USM) 
Dr. Zaitun Md Yassin (NSM) 
Dr. Hanapi Jusoh (IIUM ) 
Dr. Nor Azwani Shukri (IIUM ) 
Dr. Sharifah W ajihah Wafa (UniSZA) 
Dr. Yasmin Ooi Beng Houi (UMS) 
Dr. Norazmir Md Nor (UiTM) 
Ms . Nurul Huda Ibrahim (MOH) 
Ms . Fatimah Zurina Mohama d (M OH) 
Ms . Intan Hartini Ahmad Bidin (M OH) 
Ms . Siti Adibah AB Ha lim (MOH) 
xiv Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Mi nerals and Trace Elements 
Emeritus Professor Dr. Khor Geok Lin (UPM) - C hairperson 
Professor Dr. Zalilah Mohd Shariff (UP M ) 
Professor Dr. Winnie Chee Siew Swee (IMU) 
As sociate Professor Dr. Loh Su Peng (UP M) 
As sociate Professor Dr. Hasnah Haron (UKM) 
As sociate Professor Dr. Chan Yoke Mun (UPM) 
As sociate Professor Dr. Foo Leng Huat (USM) 
Dr. Mahenderan Appukutty (UiTM) 
Dr. Wong Jyh Eiin (UKM) 
Dr. Roseline Yap Wai Kuan (Taylor’s U) 
M s Viola Michael (MOH) 
M r Mohamad Soffian Mohamad Rasid (M OH) 
M s Munirah Mohd Nasir (MOH ) 
M s Noor Ul-Aziha Muhamma d (MOH) 
RNI M alaysia 2017 Technical Sub Com mittees 
xv Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
C hief Editor 
Mohd Ismail Noor 
Editors 
Poh Bee Koon 
Tee E Siong 
Khor  Geok Lin 
Gui Shir Ley 
External Editor 
Zawiah Hashim 
C ontributors to Chapters 
Introduction 
Mohd Ismail Noor, Taylor’s University* 
Poh Bee Koon, UKM 
Tee E Siong, NSM 
K hor Geok Lin, UPM 
C hapter 1 • Energy 
Poh Bee Koon, UKM* 
Mohd Ismail Noor, Taylor’s University 
H azizi Abu Saad, UPM 
Tan Sue Yee, IMU 
C hapter 2 • Proteins 
K hairul Zarina Mohd Yusop, MOH* 
Chin Yit Siew, UPM 
N ur Am alina Muhamad, MOH 
Mohd Nasir Mohd Taib, UPM 
Rosli Mohd Sali, HKL 
Wa n Abdul Manan Wan Muda, USM 
C hapter 3 • Fats 
Tilakavati Karupaiah, UKM* 
Sokhini A M utalib, UPM 
Mohd Razif Shahril, UniSZA 
Chuah Khun Aik, UKM 
N urul Aznyda Norizan, IMR 
C hapter 4 • Carbohydrates 
N ik Shanita Safii, UKM* 
Ruzita Abd Talib, UKM 
Safiah Mohd Yusof, IMU 
Jam ilah Ahmad, MOH 
Chapter 5 • Thiamin (Vitamin B1) 
Zaitun Md Yassin, NSM 
Chapter 6 • Riboflavin (Vitamin B2) 
Norimah A. Karim, UKM 
Chapter 7 • Niacin (Vitamin B3) 
Nurul Huda Ibrahim, MOH 
Chapter 8 • Pantothenic Acid (Vitamin B5) 
Norazmir Md Noor, UiTM 
Chapter 9 • Pyridoxine (Vitamin B6) 
Yasmin Ooi Beng Houi, UMS 
Chapter 10 • Folate (V itamin B9) 
Amin Ismail, UPM 
Chapter 11 • Cobalamine (V itamin B12) 
Sharifah Wa jihah Wafa, UniSZA 
Chapter 12 • Ascorbic Acid (Vitamin C) 
Suzana Shahar, UKM 
Chapter 13 • Vitamin A 
Intan Hartini Ahma d Bidin, MOH* 
Fatimah Zurina Mohama d, MOH 
Siti Adibah AB  Halim, MOH 
Chapter 14 • Vitamin D 
Hamid Jan Jan Mohamed, USM 
Editors and Contributors 
xvi Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Chapter 15 • Vitamin E 
Ha napi Jusoh, IIUM 
Chapter 16 • Vitamin K 
Nor Azwani Shukri, IIUM 
Chapter 17 • Calcium 
Wi nnie Chee Siew Swee, IMU 
Chapter 18 • Iron 
Loh Su Peng, UPM* 
Noor Ul-Aziha Muhammad, MOH 
Chapter 19 • Iodine 
Moham ad Soffian Mohamad Rashid, MOH 
Chapter 20 • Zinc 
Zalilah Mohd Shariff, UPM* 
Mahenderan Appukutty, UiTM 
Chapter 21 • Selenium 
Munirah Mohd Nasir, MOH* 
Zalilah Mohd Shariff. UPM 
Chapter 22 • Phosphorus 
Ch an Yoke Mun, UPM 
Chap ter 23 • Sodium 
V iola Michael, MOH 
Chap ter 24 • Potassium 
Hasnah Haron, UKM 
Chap ter 25 • Magnesium 
Winnie Chee Siew Swee, IMU 
Chap ter 26 • Chromium 
Foo Leng Huat, USM 
Chap ter 27 • Copper 
Wong Jyh Eiin, UKM 
Chap ter 28 • Manganese 
R oseline Yap Wai Kuan, Taylor’s University 
Chap ter 29 • Molybdenum 
Khor Geok Lin, UPM 
Chap ter 30 • Fluoride 
Khor Geok Lin, UPM 
N ote: * Main Author 
1Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Introduction to RNI 2017 
A nutrient is a component in foods that an organism uses to survive and grow. Macronutrients 
provide the bulk energy an organism’s metabolic system needs to function while micronutrients 
provide the necessary cofactors for metabolism to be carried out. Bo th types of nutrients can be 
acquired from the environment. Micronutrients are used to build and repair tissues and to regulate 
body processes while macronutrients are converted to, and used for energy. Nutrient recommendations 
differ with age, sex and physiological condition. 
1.1 Evolution of Nutrient Recomm endations 
The first recommendation w as reported by Dr. E Smith (1862) during the “Cotton Famine” 
to determ ine the least cost for wh ich sufficient food could be purchased to prevent starvation 
and associated diseases in economically depressed and unemployed populations in the United 
Kingdom  (UK). During the First World War (1914-1919), a recomme ndation was set for energy 
(Lusk) and to feed the army and nation in the UK. The British Medical Association was among the 
early authorities to formulate recommen dations “to maintain health and working capacity” during 
the economic depression. In 19 36, the Technical Commission of the H ealth Co mmittee of the 
League of Nations (which became the United Nations in 1946 published its first nutrient-based 
dietary standards which sought to answer the following questions: What are the nutritional needs 
of human beings?  How can they be recognized?  How can it be determined that they are being 
satisfied? (TCHC-LO N, 1936). In 19 41, the US National R esearch Co uncil proposed a 
recomm endation w ith the aim of “building up of our people to a level of health and vigour never 
before attained or dreamed of.”(NRC, 1941). 
The first edition was published in 1943 to provide “standards to serve as a goal for good 
nutrition.”  Because RDA are intended to reflect the best scientific judgm ent on nutrient allowances 
for the maintenance of good health and to serve as the basis for evaluating the adequacy of diets 
of groups of people, the initial publication has been revised periodically to incorporate new 
scientific knowledge and interpretations. The RDAs were then replaced by Dietary Reference 
Intakes (DRIs) which refers to a set of 4 nutrient-based reference values Estimated Average 
Requirement  (EAR), Recom m ended Dietary Allowance (RDA), Adequate Intake (AI) and Tolerable 
U pper Intake Level (UL). The first set of DRI  for calcium and related nutrients was published by 
IO M  in 1997 followed by sets covering other nutrients (IOM , 1997, 1998, 2000, 2001 and 2002). 
Subsequen tly, IOM published DRI updates for water, potassium, sodium, chloride and sulphate 
(2004), for energy, carbohydrates, fibre, fat, fatty acids, cholesterol, protein and amino acids 
(2002/2005) and calcium and vitamin D (2011). By the 1940s, a number  of countries including 
India (1944) and the Philippines (1941) had established their first national Re comme nded Daily 
Allowances.  
Since 1949, FAO  joined by WHO in the early 1950s and later by UNU in 1981 have convened 
groups of experts to evaluate scientific knowledge in order to define the energy requireme nts and 
propose d dietary energy recommendat ions for populations published by WH O (19 85). The 
C om m ission of the European Commu nities Office in Luxembur g published the nutrient and energy 
intake for the European Com mu nities (CE C, 1993). Subsequently, an expert consultation took 
place in Rome from 17-24 October 2001 with a mandate to revise and update the 1985 report, 
w hich was published by FAO/WHO/UNU  in 2004. 
2 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Introduction to RN I 201 7 
The FAO /WHO/UNU  have played major roles in consultative efforts to define human nutrient 
requirements. Arising from  these consultations were several landmark reports including those that 
addressed the requireme nts for minerals (Appendix 1). The 2002 FAO /WHO  Joint Report became 
a definitive reference resource on recommended intake of vitamins and minerals for countries 
worldwide. The recommendations included 13 vitamins and 6 minerals, the latter being calcium, 
iodine, iron, magnesium, selenium and zinc. The individual nutrients in the FAO /WH O 2002 Report 
m ade considerable reference to the Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) of the Institute of Medicine 
(IO M ), Food and Nutrition Board, United States. The DRIs were and are still deemed as the most 
current scientific knowledge on nutrient needs of healthy populations built upon experimental 
evidence and extensive literature reviews. Appendix 2 shows the IOM reports that were cited in 
F AO/WHO (2002). Also, during the past decade, several relevant updates on dietary intake 
recom me ndations were published (Appendix 3). More recently, the European Foo d Safety 
Authority (EFSA) h ave published recomm endation for energy (2013), folate (2014) and 
cobalamine (2015) 
In Malaysia, a Technical Sub-Comm ittee was formed in 1969 with representatives from the 
Institute for Medical Res earch and Public Health Institute of the M inistry of H ealth, WHO and 
U niversity of Malaya “to provide advice on dietary aspects of the then proposed Applied Nutrition 
Pilot Project”. This group prepared a new d ietary standard based on various WHO 
recom men dations published between 1964 and 1973 (Teoh, 1975), which was subseque ntly 
published as the Malaysian RDI in 1975. The task of reviewing and revising the 1975 RDA was 
assigned to the Technical Working Group (TWG) on Nutritional Guidelines established under the 
National Coordinating Comm ittee on Food and Nutrition (NCCFN) , Ministry of Health Malaysia. The 
first meeting of the Technical Com mittee was held on the 20th Septembe r 2002 and the revised 
dietary recommen dation, RNI  for Malaysia, was published in 2005. Advances in scientific 
knowledge in the last decade coupled with the deteriorating state of health of the nation prompted 
the Technical Working Group in a meeting held on 13 February 2015 to review and revise the RNI 
2005. 
1.2 Nomenclature and interpretations  
A variety of terms  are commonly used with reference to dietary recomme ndations, including 
terms such as recomme nded dietary allowances, recomme nded daily allowances, recommended 
daily amounts, recommended nutrient intakes, among ot hers. In this review, the term 
Recomm ended Nutrient Intake (RNI) is maintained. 
The Food and Nutrition Board that devised the RDAs in the USA defined Recommended Daily 
Allowance as “the level of intake of essential nutrients that, on the basis of scientific knowledge, 
are judged by the Food and Nutrition Board to be adequate to meet the known nutrient needs of 
practically all healthy persons” (NRC, 1980). Although new information is available as a result of 
the development of more precise techniques of determining hum an nutritional requireme nts, the 
definition has remained essentially unchanged since the 8th edition (NRC, 1974). 
Estimates of energy requiremen ts are derived from measurem ents of individuals. 
Measurem ents of a collection of individuals of the same sex and similar age, body size and 
physical activity are grouped together to give the average energy requirement - or recommende d 
level of dietary intake - for a class of people or a population group. These requireme nts are then 
3Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Introduction to RN I 2017 
used to predict the requirements and recommended levels of energy intake for other individuals 
w ith similar characteristics, but on whom m easuremen ts have not been  m ade. Althou gh 
individuals in a given class have been matched for characteristics that may affect requirements, 
such as sex, age, body size, body composition and lifestyle, there remain unknown factors that 
produce variations among individuals. Consequently, there is a distribution of requirements within 
the class or population group (WHO, 1985) (Figure 1.1) 
Energy
Percentage of individuals
Average
requirement
Level of requirement(Low) (High)
Figure 1.1 Distribution of energy requirements of a population group or class of individuals* 
*It is assumed that individual requirements are randomly distributed about the mean requirem ents for the 
class of individuals, and that the distribution is Gaussian. 
Source: WHO,  1985. 
For most specific nutrients, a certain excess of intake will not be harmful. Thus, when dietary 
recommend ations are calculated for these nutrients, the variation among individuals in a class or 
population group is taken into account, and the recomm ended level of intake is an amount that 
w ill meet or exceed the requirements of practically all individuals in the group. For example, the 
recomm ended safe level of intake for proteins is the average requireme nt of the population group, 
plus 2 standard deviations. This approach cannot be applied to dietary energy recom me ndations, 
because intakes that exceed requireme nts will produce a positive balance, which may lead to 
overw eight and obesity in the long term. A high level of energy intake that assures a low 
probability of energy deficiency for most people (e.g. the average requireme nt plus 2 standard 
deviations) also implies a high probability of obesity for most people owing to a dietary energy 
excess (Figure 1.2). Therefore, in agreement with earlier reports, this expert consultation 
concluded that the descriptor of the dietary energy intake that could be safely recom mended for 
a population group is the estimated average energy requirement of that group. 
4 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Introduction to RN I 201 7 
The dietary energy sources are mainly from food carbohydrates, fats and proteins. Hence, 
the proportion of macronutrients contributing towards energy intake may contribute risk of 
chronic disease. As such the Acceptable Macronutrient Distribution Ranges (AMD Rs) are 
recom m ended macronutrient intakes that are associated with reduced risk of chronic disease. 
AMD Rs apply for carbohydrates, proteins and fats; and are expressed in percent of calories from 
total daily energy (%TEI). WHO/F AO  (2003) set population goals for macronutrient intakes as a 
percentage of energy intakes. Although the values are similar to those specified by US/Canadian 
adequate m acronutrient distribution ranges (AMDRs), they are interpreted differently. The 
US/Canadian standards refer to adequate ranges for usual intakes of individuals, whereas the 
WH O  standards refer to mean intake goals for populations or large groups. 
Average
 requirement
Probability that stipulated intake is 
inadequate for a randomly selected individual
Probability that stipulated intake is
excessive for a randomly selected individual
0
1.0
0
1.0
Usual level of intake(low intake) (high intake)
Figure 1.2  Probability that a particular energy intake is adequate or excessive for an 
individual* 
* Individuals are randomly selected among a class of people or a population group. The two probability 
curves overlap, so the level of energy intake that assures a low probability of dietary energy deficiency is the 
same level that implies a high probability of obesity owing to dietary energy excess. 
Source: WHO, 1985. 
The dietary requirement for a micronutrient is defined as an intake level, which mee ts 
specified criteria for adequacy, thereby minimizing risk of nutrient deficit or excess. Functional 
assays are presently the most relevant indices of subclinical conditions related to vitamin and 
m ineral intakes. The choice of criteria used to define requirements is of critical importance, since 
the recomm ended nutrient intake to meet the defined requirement will clearly vary, depending, 
am ong other factors, on the criterion used to define nutrient adequacy. Unfortunately, the 
information base to scientifically support the definition of nutritional needs across age ranges, sex 
and physiologic states is limited for many nutrients. Where relevant and possible, requirement 
estimates presented here include an allowance for variations in micronutrient bioavailability and 
utilization. 
5Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Introduction to RN I 2017 
Re comme nded nutrient intake (RNI ) is the daily intake, set at estimated average requirem ent 
(EAR) plus 2 standard deviations (SD ), which meets the nutrient requiremen ts of almost all 
apparently healthy individuals in an age- and sex-specific population group. If the distribution of 
requirement  values is not known, a Gaussian or normal distribution can be assumed, and from 
this it is expected that the mean requirement plus 2 SD will cover the nutrient needs of 97.5% of 
the population. If the SD is not known, a value based on each nutrient’s physiology can be used 
and in most cases a variation in the range of 10-12.5% can be assume d (exceptions are noted 
within relevant chapters). Because of the considerable daily variation in micronutrient intake, daily 
requirement  refers to the average intake over a period of time. The cumulative risk function for 
deficiency and toxicity is defined in Figure 1.3, which illustrates that as nutrient intake increases 
the risk of deficit drops and at higher intakes the risk of toxicity increases. The definition of RNI 
used in this report is equivalent to that of the recommended dietary allowance (RDA) as used by 
the Food and Nutrition Board of the United States National Academy of Sciences (FNB, 2001). 
Figure 1.3 Risk function of deficiency and excess for individuals in a population related to 
food intake, assuming a Gaussian distribution of requirements to prevent deficit and avoid 
excess 
The shaded ranges correspond to different approaches to defining requireme nts to prevent deficit and excess, 
respectively. The estim ated average requirement (EAR) is the average daily intake required to prevent deficit 
in half of the population. The recomm end nutrient intake (RN I) is the amount necessary to me et the needs 
of mo st (9 7.5%) of the population, set as the EAR  plus 2 standard deviations. The tolerable upper intake level 
(UL) is the level at which no evidence of toxicity is demonstrable. 
Source: WHO/F AO  (2004) 
Cumulative risk
Risk of
deficit
Risk of
excess
EAR RNI UL
Total Intake
Criteria to
define
requirements
Criteria to
define 
excess
1.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Acceptable range of intake
6 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Introduction to RN I 201 7 
To address the issues resulting from the application of a single value, the RDA, to a variety 
of uses and to incorporate the concept of reduction of risk to chronic dege nerative diseases, the 
US Food and Nutrition Board (FNB), in collaboration w ith Health Canada (HC)  and the Canadian 
National Institute of Nutrition (CNIN), developed four types of nutrient-based reference values, 
each for a particular use or uses, and collectively called “Dietary Reference Intakes” or DRIs (IOM, 
2000). The DRIs refer to the com plete set of reference intakes, including the RDA (recommended 
dietary allowance), AI (adequate intake), UL (tolerable upper intake level), and EAR (estimated 
average requirement). DRIs are expressed as intakes per day but are meant to represent average 
intakes of individuals over time. It is thought that the nutrient intake can vary substantially from 
day to day without ill effects. Each DRI expression (RDA, AI, UL, and EAR) has specific uses for 
planning and assessing diets or for applications to nutrition policy and education. The RNI 2017 
for Malaysia adapted the concept of IOM but replaces the term ‘RDA’ with “RNI” (Figure 1.4). 
Observed Level of Intake
EAR1.0
0.5
0
0.02
1.0
0.5
0
RNI
AI
UL
Risk of Excess
Risk of Inadequacy
Figure 1.4 Conceptual framework for IOM/FNB’s DRIs 
Source: IOM  (2005) 
The estimated average requiremen t (EAR) is recommended by IOM (2005) for assessing 
diets for individuals and groups. For the individual, the EAR is used to examine  the probability of 
inadequacy (or adequacy) of reported usual intake of the individual. Hence the probability of 
his/her intake is <0.5 when intake is below the EAR, as defined by the specified indicator of 
adequacy. For the group, the EAR is used to estimate the prevalence of inadequacy (or adequacy) 
of usual intake within a group. 
The estimated average requiremen t (EAR) is the median intake value that is estimated to 
m eet the requirement, as defined by specified indicator of adequacy, in half of the individuals in 
a life-stage or sex group. At this level of intake, the other half of a specified group will not have 
its nutritional needs met. The EAR is used to calculate the RDA. 
The recomm ended dietary allowance (RDA) Recommen ded Nutrient Intake (RNI) is the 
average daily dietary intake level that is sufficient to meet the requirement of nearly all healthy 
individuals in a particular life stage and gender group. If the distribution of requirement  of the 
7Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Introduction to RN I 2017 
group is assum ed to be normal, then the RDA RNI is the value compute d as EAR + 2SD) to cover 
that exceeds requirement of almost  all individuals in the popu lation (97 to 98 percent) of the 
individuals in the group. The RD A is intended for use primarily as a goal for usual intake of 
individuals. 
If sufficient scientific evidence is not available to establish an EAR and set a RDA, RNI an 
adequate intake (AI) is derived instead.  The AI is based on experime ntally derived intake levels 
or approximations of observed mean nutrient intakes by a group (or groups) of apparently healthy 
people who are maintaining a defined nutritional state or criterion of adequacy. 
The tolerable upper intake level (UL) is the highest level of continuing daily nutrient intake 
that is likely to pose no risk of adverse health effects in almost all individuals in the specified life 
stage group.  As intake increases above the UL, the potential risk of diverse effect increases.  The 
term  tolerable intake was chosen to avoid implying a possible beneficial effect. The UL is not 
intended to be a recommended level of intake. 
1.3 Age-categories and reference weight 
In developing the recommendations, it was necessary to standardize body weights for the 
various age/gend er groups. The age categories adopted for the RNI are as shown in Table 1.1. All 
age groups remain similar to the 2005 RNI  except for infancy, wh ich was divided into four 
quarterly groups. The reference heights for the various age categories were derived from  the 
National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS) 2015 dataset (IPH, 2015). Re ference weights for 
children aged 9 years and below were derived from weight-for-age medians based on the WHO 
2006 growth standards and WH O 2007 growth reference. For adolescents aged 10 - 18 years, 
reference weight was derived as mass equivalent to the WH O 2007 BMI-for-age med ian based on 
the reference height, while in adults aged 19 years and above, reference weight was derived as 
m ass equivalent to BMI 22.0 based on reference height. The reference weights and heights 
according to age groupings adopted for use in the proposed Malaysian RNI 2017 are as shown 
in Table 1.1. 
8 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Introduction to RN I 201 7 
Table 1.1 Reference body weights and heights for the Malaysian population 
Age group 1
Males 
Body weight (kg) 2 Length/Height (cm) 3
Fem ales Males Fem ales 
0 – 2.9 months 4.5 4.2 54.7 53.7 
3 – 5.9 months 7.0 6.4 63.9 62.1 
6 – 8.9 months 8.3 7.6 69.2 67.3 
9 – 11.9 months 9.2 8.5 73.3 71.5 
1 – 3 years 12.2 11.5 88.6 86.3 
4 – 6 years 18.3 18.2 108.9 108.5 
7 – 9 years 25.4 25.0 125.5 123.4 
10 – 12 years 33.4 35.4 140.5 143.5 
13 – 15 years 49.6 46.5 161.5 154.0 
16 – 18 years 59.2 50.3 167.5 154.8 
19 – 29 years 61.4 52.9 167.0 155.0 
30 – 59 years 60.6 52.2 166.0 154.1 
60 – 64 years 58.5 50.2 163.0 151.0 
≥ 65 years 57.7 48.8 162.0 149.0 
1 Fo r all age categories, the ending age extends till just before the beginning age of the subsequent category. For 
example, for the category 0-5 months, 5 months include up to 5.9 months. 
2 Children 0-9 years: WHO weight-for-age median; Adolescents 10-18 years: mass equivalent to WHO BMI -for- 
age median based on NHM S 2015 median heights; Adults: mass equivalent to BMI 22.0 based on NHMS 2015 
m edian heights. 
3 NH MS  2015 database, median heights. 
9Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Introduction to RN I 2017 
1.4 The nutrients reviewed 
Having considered emerging evidence on the connections between diet and health and the 
recent recomme ndations from  FA O/WHO /UNU, IOM, EFSA, the Technical Wo rking G roups 
identified 13 new nutrients (in italics) m aking a total of 30 nutrients listed below, as compared to 
17 nutrients (RNI, 2005). 
Energy/Macronutrients            Vitamins M inerals & Trace Elem ents 
1. Energy 5. Thiamin (Vitamin B1) 17. Calcium 
2. Protein 6. Riboflavin (Vitamin B2) 18. Iron 
3. Fat 7. Niacin (Vitamin B3) 19. Iodine 
4. Carbohydrate 8. Pantothenic Acid (Vitamin B5) 20. Zinc 
9. Pyridoxine (Vitamin B6 ) 21. Selenium 
10. Folate (Vitamin B9) 22. Pho sphorus 
11. Cobalam in (Vitam in B12) 23. Sod ium 
12. Ascorbic Acid (Vitamin C) 24. Potassium 
13. Vitamin A 25. Mag nesium 
14. Vitamin D 26. Chromium 
15. Vitamin E 27. Copper 
16 . Vitam in K 28. Man ganese 
29. Mo lybdenum 
30. Fluoride 
1.5 W hat is new in this Report 
The Executive Summary have presented in detail this updated version (RNI , 2017) and 
among others; 
• Reference body weights for adults are calculated based on desired BMI of 22.0 and average 
height of the Malaysian population 
• Estimated energy requirements are based on physical activity levels (PALs) 
• For energy requirements (infants) 4 age-categories, 0-2, 3-5, 6-8 and 9-11 months 
• Nine (9) new minerals and 4 new vitamins are added to this report 
• Age categories differs slightly for the minerals group when compared to the energy and 
macronutrient and vitamin groups. 
10 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Introduction to RN I 201 7 
1.6 Uses of RNI 
The uses of recommended nutrient intakes (RNI ) include the following: 
Policy Maker 
• Planning and mon itoring of the national food supplies and stockpile of food for emergencies. 
• As a basis for development of the National Dietary Guidelines. 
• As a reference for development of relevant policies (e.g. Agriculture policy). 
Program  Planner 
• Evaluation of dietary intakes for the population/ identified groups. 
• Ensuring adequacy nutrients in food intervention programme. 
• As reference in the development of education materials for nutrition promotion. 
• Identifying risk of inadequate nutrient intakes for certain groups. 
Food Industry and Marketing 
• Reference for nutrition labelling of foods and supplements 
• Guide for nutrient claims on food products 
• Food product innovation and food fortification 
C linical Practitioner 
• Assist in development of therapeutic diet manuals. 
• Assessment  of individual diets. 
• Plan modified diets. 
• Planning procurement of food supplies and menus for hospital/ institution. 
Researcher 
• As a main reference for dietary analysis for epidemiological studies. 
• Evaluation of nutritional quality of foods by calculating the nutrient density index. 
Recomm ended Nutrient Intake (RNI) and Chronic Disease 
The RNI can also be used as a guide to reduce risk of chronic diseases. The replacement of 
nutrient-poor, energy-dense foods and drinks with generous amount of vegetables, fruits and 
wholegrain cereals can help prevent chronic diseases. The suggested target of nutrients intake in 
order to reduce risk of chronic diseases is equivalent to the 90th centile of population 
recomme nded nutrient intake. Howev er, in order to achieve the target, it is recom me nded that the 
intake should be from natural food sources rather than commerci ally available dietary suppleme nts. 
In relation to the increasing prevalence of obesity and NCDs in the country, the Technical 
Wor king Group in Nutritional Guidelines has agreed to estimate the energy requirement for all 
groups using reference body weight calculated based on desired BMI of 22.0. The revised energy 
requirement s are generally lower than RNI (2005) by about 8 - 18%, mainly for the adolescents 
and adults age groups. 
11 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Introduction to RN I 2017 
1.7   References. 
EF SA  (2013). Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies (NDA). Scientific O pinion on 
Dietary Reference Values for Energy. European Fo od Safety Authority EFSA Journal 
11(1):3005. Doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2013.3005 
EF SA  (2014). Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies (NDA). Scientific O pinion on 
Dietary Reference Values for Folate. European Food Safety Authority EFSA Journal 
12(11):3893,59pp.doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2014.3893 
EF SA  (2015). Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies (NDA). Scientific O pinion on 
Dietary Reference Values for Cobalamine (Vitamin B12) Europe an Food Safety Authority 
EFS A Journal 2015;13(7):4150 [64 pp.]. 
FA O /WH O  (2002). Vitamin A. In: Human Vitamin and Mineral Requireme nts. Re port of a Joint 
FAO /WH O  Expert Consultation. FAO, Rome; pp 87-107. 
FA O /WH O /UNU (2004). Human Energy Requirements. Re port of a Joint FAO /W H O/UNU Expert 
Co nsultation. Food and Nutrition Technical Report Series, Food and Agricultural Organization, 
Rom e. 
Food and Nutrition Board (2001) Dietary reference intakes : applications in dietary assessm ent. 
Washington, DC, National Academy Press. 
Institute for Public Health (IPH) 2015. National Health and Morbidity Survey 2015 (NH M S 2015). 
IOM  (1997). Calcium . In: Dietary references for Calcium, Phosphorus, Magne sium , Vitamin D 
and Fluoride. Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine. National Academy Press, 
Washington DC; pp 71-145. 
IOM (1998). Thiam in . In: Dietary References Intakes for Thiamine, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitam in 
B6, Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin and Choline. Food and Nutrition Board, 
Institute of Medicine. National Academy Press, Washington DC. 
IO M  (2000). Ascorbic acid. In: Dietary Reference Intakes for Ascorbic acid, Vitamin E, Selenium, 
and Carotenoids. Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine. National Academy Press, 
Washington DC. 
IO M  (2001). Vitamin A. In: Dietary References Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron, 
Chr omium, C opper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium and 
Zinc. Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine. National Academy  Press, Wa shington 
DC . 
IO M  (2002). Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrates, Fiber, Fat, Protein and Amino 
Acids (Macronutrients). Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine. National Academy 
Press, Washington D.C. 
IOM  (2004). D ietary Reference Intakes for Water, Potassium, Sodium, Chloride and Sulphate. 
Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine. National Academy  Press, Washington D.C. 
IO M (2005). Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrates, Fibre, Fat, Fatty Acids, 
Cholesterol, Protein and Amino Acids. Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Me dicine. 
National Academy Press, Washington D.C. 
IO M (2011). Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamn D and Calcium. F ood and Nu trition Board, 
Institute of Medicine. National Academy Press, Washington D.C. 
NR C (1941). Recommended Dietary Allowances: Protein, Calcium, Iron, Vitamin A, Vitamin B 
(Thiamin), Vitamin C (Ascorbic Acid), R iboflavin, Nicotinic Acid and Vitamin D. National 
Research Council, Washington DC. 
NR C (1974). Recommended Dietary Allowances . 8 th Edition, National Academ y Press, Washington 
DC . 
NR C (1980). Recommended Dietary Allowances. 9 th Edition, National Academ y Press, Washington 
DC . 
TCH C-LO N (1936). Repo rt on the physiological bases of nutrition. Qua rterly Bulletin of the Health 
Org anisation of the League of Nations, Vol. V, Extract No.6. Technical Commis sion of the 
Health Com mittee, League of Nations 
Teoh ST (1975). Recommended daily dietary intakes for Peninsular Malaysia. Med  J Mal 30: 38- 
42. 
WHO (1985). Energy and protein requirements. Report of a joint FAO /WH O /U NU expe rt 
consultation. WHO Technical Report Series No. 724, Geneva. 
WHO (2003). Diet, nutrition and prevention of chronic diseases. Wo rld Health Organization, 
Geneva. 
W HO /FAO (2004). Vitamin and mineral requirements in human nutrition (Second edition) Report 
of a Joint FAO/WH O Expert Consultation (Bangkok, 21-30 Septem ber 1998), pp362. 
WH O . 2006. The WHO Child Growth Standards. Geneva: W orld Health Organization, Geneva. 
WH O . 2007. Growth reference data for 5-19 years. Geneva: Wor ld Health Organization, Geneva. 
12 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Introduction to RN I 201 7 
13 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Introduction to RN I 2017 
Appendix I 
• W H O  (1962). Technical Report Series No: 230. WHO, Geneva (Calcium) 
• WH O (1970). Technical Report Series No: 452. WHO, Gene va. (Iron, Folate, Vitamin B12 and 
Ascorbic acid) 
• FA O /WHO (1974). Handbook on Human Nutritional Requireme nts. WHO, Ge neva. 
• FA O /WHO/UNU (1985). Expert Consultation.  Energy and Protein Requirements . WHO, Geneva 
• F AO/WHO (1988 ). Expert Consultation Report on the Requirements for Vitamin A, Iron, Folate, and 
Vitamin B12. WHO , Geneva 
• FA O /WHO/IA EA (1996).  Report on Trace Elements in Human Nutrition and Health. WHO, Ge neva 
• FA O /WHO (2002). Report of a Joint Consultation.  Human Vitamin and Mineral Requirements . 
W H O , Geneva 
Appendix 2 
• IOM  (1997). Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium, Ph osphorus, Magne sium, Vitamin D, and 
Fluoride. 
• IOM  (1998). Dietary Reference Intakes for Thiam in, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B6, Folate, Vitamin 
B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin, and Choline . 
• IO M  (2000). Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Selenium and Carotenoids. 
• IOM ( 2001). Dietary Re ference Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitam in K, Arsenic, Boron, Chromi um, 
Copper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and Zinc. 
Appendix 3 
• IO M  (2005). Dietary Reference Intakes for Water, Potassium, Sodium, Chloride, and Sulfate. 
• IO M  (2006). Dietary Reference Intakes: The Essential Guide to Nutrient Requireme nts. 
• IO M  (2011).  Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium and Vitamin D. 
• M inistry of Health (2006).  Nutrient Reference Values for Australia and Ne w Zealand. MOH, 
Canberra. 
• Australian Dietary Guidelines (2013). DoHA, NHMRC. 
• European Dietary Reference Values for Nutrient Intakes (www.efsa.europa.eu) 
• MH LW (2015) Dietary Reference Intakes for Japanese. MHLW, Tokyo. 
• FNRI  (2015). Philippine Dietary Reference Intakes. Departmen t of Science and Technology, Manila. 
14 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Summ ary 
Energy and Macronutrients 
Recommendations  
The Technical Sub-Commi ttee (TSC ) on Energy and Macronutrients reviewe d the recommendations 
by referencing the latest available publications of the FAO /WHO /UNU (2004), Institute of Medicine 
(IO M, 2002) and the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA , 2013) reports. 
The proposed  recommendati on for energy is still based on the factorial method of the 
FA O/W HO /UNU 2004 report; however , energy values were proposed for four levels of physical activity, 
namely low active (PAL 1.4), moderately active (PAL 1.6), active (PAL 1.8) and very active (PAL 2.0). 
Energy recomm endation for individuals should be based on their actual physical activity level, but for 
population groups, the recomm endation of PAL 1.6 can be adopted. Four recom mendations of energy 
for infants were made for each 3-monthly age group as com pared to RNI  2005 where only two 
recommendat ions were m ade for 6-monthly age groups. Energy recomme ndations are now available 
for the first trimester of pregnancy as we ll as the second and third trimester recommenda tions 
previously available in RNI 2005. 
The revision for protein was done based on recent consensus statements  that suggested protein 
intake between 1.0 and 1.5 g/kg/day could confers health benefits beyond those afforded by simply 
meet ing the current requirement. Overall, the protein recomme ndations for infants and children are 
lower than the previous RNI  2005 due to a technical error in the F AO /WH O /UNU 1985 report that 
overestimated protein requirement considerably for this age group. Protein recommendation for 
pregnancy was also revised based on a slightly higher total gestational weight gain and is available for 
the second and third trimesters. 
There are no specific recommen dations for fats and carbohydrates but only as a percentage of 
contributions towards total daily energy intake (TEI). The TSC reviewed current evidence and 
recommends that macronutrient contribution towards TEI for Malaysian adults should be as follows: 
carbohydrates 50 – 65%TEI, fat 25 – 30%TEI, and protein 10 – 20%TEI. Of these, intake of free sugar 
should be 10%TEI or less, whereas intake of dietary fibre should be between 20 to 30 grams daily, for 
the prevention of diet-related chronic diseases. Recommendations for n-3 and n-6 polyunsaturated, 
monounsaturated, saturated as well as trans fatty acids are also provided based on %TEI. 
15 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
1 • Energy 
1.1 Introduction 
An important goal in hum an nutrition is to ensure that the energy ingested in food is adequate 
to meet energy demands. The body needs energy for maintaining body tempe rature, me tabolic 
activity, supporting growth and for physical work. It is also important, particularly in affluent 
societies, to m inimize excess energy intake over expenditure in order to prevent obesity and its 
complications. 
In add ition, conceptually, the prevalence of food deprivation, whi ch is termed 
undernourishment, is based on comparison of usual food consumpt ion expressed in terms of 
dietary energy (kcal) with a minimum  requirem ent level. The population group with food 
consump tion below the minim um  required level is considered unde rnourished. The focus on 
dietary energy in assessing food insufficiency or deprivation is justified from two perspectives. 
Firstly a minimum amount  of dietary energy intake is essential for body-we ight maintenance and 
wo rk performance. Secondly, increased dietary energy, if derived from  norm al staple foods, brings 
w ith it more protein and other nutrients as well, while raising intakes of the latter nutrients without 
ensuring a minimum  level of dietary energy is unlikely to be of much benefit in terms of improving 
nutritional status. 
The first imp ortant principle is that energy requirement  must be estimated on the basis of 
energy expe nditure and not of energy intake. It is based on the recognition that it is ene rgy 
expenditure that drives energy needs rather than intake, which does not necessarily reflect energy 
needs and may vary independently. 
A joint FAO/WH O/UN U Expert Con sultation on Energy in Hu man  Nu trition met in October 
2001 to review the state of the art of the scientific literature since the 1985 report and to arrive 
at recomme ndations for energy requireme nt throughout the life cycle (FA O/WHO/UN U  2004). The 
report published in 2004 defined energy requirement as “the amount of food energy needed to 
balance energy expenditure in order to maintain body size, body com position and a level of 
necessary and desirable physical activity, consistent with long-term good health”. This includes 
the energy needed for optimal growth and developme nt of children, for depo sition of tissues 
during pregnancy and for secretion of milk during lactation consistent with good health of the 
mot her and child. 
The estimation of energy requirement is based on the factorial approach, which expresses 
energy requirement/expenditure, as well as its various com ponents, as multiples of basal 
met abolic rate (BMR). Besides being the largest component of energy expenditure, as high as 
70%  in sedentary individuals, expressing energy expenditure/requirements in terms of BMR 
factors make it unnecessary to correct for body weight, thus simplifying the calculation and 
allowing for easier and more meaningful comparisons among diverse population groups. It is, 
how ever, recognized that a residual variability remained of BMR/kg body we ight at the diverse 
w eights, with higher values per unit body weight in smaller individuals than in bigger ones. The 
factorial approach consists of the summ ation of various activities representing the energy 
expenses, such as the costs of diverse types of physical activity, the extra energy allocated for 
pregnancy and lactation and the energy cost of growth. 
16 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
1.2 Principles of energy balance and energy requirements 
Principles of energy balance 
The standard unit of energy is the joule and human energetics is usually expressed in terms 
of kilojoules (i.e. joules x 1000). A megajoule (MJ) is 1000 kJ. O ne kilocalorie or C alorie = 4.184 
kJ. It is a fundamental principle of thermodynamics that energy cannot ‘disappear’. Food energy 
eaten has to be either excreted in the faeces or absorbed by the body. Once absorbed, a small 
am ount of energy is excreted in the urine as the by-product of protein metabolism and the rest 
of the absorbed fuel has to be metabolized for energy or stored in the tissue as fat or as 
carbohydrate in the form of glycogen. Metabolized energy supports the ma king of new chemical 
com poun ds within the body, fuels the muscular activity required to breathe, digest food and 
ma intain body posture, and also provides energy for physical activity (Jame s & Schofield, 1990). 
Principles of energy requirements 
Energy needs are determ ined by energy expenditure. Therefore, in principle, estimates of 
requirement s should be based on measurements of energy expenditure. Components  of energy 
expenditure include basal metabolic rate, physical activity, metabolic cost of food and metabolic 
cost of growth. 
Basal metabolic rate 
Physiologically, BMR is defined as the lowest rate of energy exchange in the body, which is 
related to the organization of bodily functions and production of body heat.  Technically, it is 
defined as the rate of energy expenditure of a fasted and fully-rested individual in a thermoneutral 
environment  or can simply be defined as the minim al rate of energy expenditure compatible with 
life. 
Since basal me tabolic rate (BM R) is the largest compo nent of energy expenditure, it has 
been adopted by the FA O/WH O/U NU  Expert Committ ee 1981 as the basis for calculating all 
com ponents of total energy expenditure. To obtain the total requireme nt, the estimate of BMR is 
m ultiplied by a factor that covers the energy cost of increased muscle tone, physical activity, the 
thermic effect of food, and where relevant, the energy requiremen ts for growth and lactation 
(FA O /WH O/UNU 1985). 
The FAO/W HO /UNU  (2004) report adopted the equations for predicting BMR from  body 
weight derived by Schofield (1985), presented in Appendix 2.1. Fo r the M alaysian population, 
Ismail et al., (1998) had reported predictive equations for adults (Appendix 2.2) and Poh et al., 
(199 9 ; 2004) for adolescents aged 10 to 18 years old (Appendix 2.3 & 2.4). More recently, Henry 
(2005) produced the Oxford equations for predicting BMR (Appendix 2.5). 
17 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
Physical activity 
The level of physical activity must be considered in detail when assessing energy needs. 
Energy needs m ay be calculated based on the amount of time spent and the energy cost of various 
activities. To facilitate the calculations, daily activities are divided into two broad categories, 
namely occupational activities and discretionary activities (FAO/WHO/UNU, 1985). Occupational 
activities include those activities that are essential for the individual and the com munity and can 
be considered as economi c activities that are life sustaining. The traditional classification of w ork 
according to occupation is important, but care must be taken to ensure that there is an adequate 
description of the occupation. Discretionary activities are additional activities outside working 
hours that may be of benefit to the communi ty, which includes recreational activities. Apart from 
that, the routines of daily living (travel to and from places, household and other chores) are other 
doma ins of activities (Samitz, Egger and Zwahlen 2011). The requireme nt to cover these activities 
should not be considered as dispensable, since it usually contributes to the physical and 
intellectual well-being of the individual, household or group. 
The FAO/WHO/UN U (2004) consultation endorsed the proposition that recom me ndations 
for dietary energy intake must be accompanied by recommendations for an appropriate level of 
habitual physical activity. The Malaysian Dietary Guidelines (2010) recommend that all individuals 
should be active every day and adults should be involved in moderate to vigorous physical activity 
at least 30 minutes per day for five to six days a week. Flexibility, strength and endurance activities 
should also be incorporated into our activities two to three times a week. Minimized inactivity 
and sedentary habits are important to lower risks associated with physical inactivity and 
sedentariness. 
In proposing the Dietary Re ference Values for Energy, European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) 
proposed adopting a physical activity level (PAL) of 1.4 to reflect low  active (sedentary), PAL 1.6 
moder ately active, PAL 1.8 active and PAL 2.0 very active lifestyles (EFS A, 2013). A low active or 
sedentary lifestyle is defined as the type of day-to-day lifestyle with minimum  amount of physical 
activity; for example, a person who performs almost all activities at work, transportation and 
leisure time in light activities. 
Examples of lifestyles equivalent to the four levels of PAL are described in Table 1.1. The 
examples given are based on a 30-year-old man with body weight of 60.6 kg and BMI 22 kg/m 2.
Appendix 1.6 provides some examples of activities based on me tabolic equivalent (MET) values 
for sedentary or inactive (METs <3), moderately active (METs 3-6) and vigorous intensity activities 
(METs >6). 
18 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
Table 1.1 : Exam ples of 24 hour activities equivalent to low active (sedentary), moderately active, 
active and very active lifestyles 
Activities Time spent (hours) 
PAL 1.4 
(Low 
active/ 
sedentary) 
PAL 1.6 
(Moderately 
active) 
PAL 1.8 
(Active) 
PAL 2.0 
(Very 
active) 
Sleeping (MET=1.0) 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 
Self care - showering, toweling off, standing, 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 
grooming, shaving, brushing teeth, putting on 
m ake-up (MET=2.0) 
Lying down and watching television (MET=1.0) 1.0 0.5 0.5 2.5 
O ffice work- sitting, writing, desk work, typing 8.0 8.0 8.0 0
(MET=1.3) 
F arm ing, driving harvester, cutting hay, irrigation 00 0 4.0 
work (MET=4.8) 
W alking & commuting from/to the car, in the 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 
house/ office (MET=2.5) 
H ome/ household activities/ task-light effort 0.0 1.5 2.0 1.0 
(MET=2.8) 
Sitting - home activities/ watching television, 5.5 4.0 3.0 7.0 
typing (MET=1.3) 
Brisk walking (MET=4.3) 0 0.5 00
Jogging (MET=7.0) 00 1.0 0
M ET = Metabolic equivalent values based on Ainsworth et al., (2011) 
Me tabolic response to food 
The increased oxygen uptake after a meal depends on the nutrient comp osition of food 
consum ed and the amount of energy ingested. The measurement of energy cost of digesting, 
absorbing and storing ingested nutrients is not easy. It is difficult to separate the energy expended 
in excess of the basal rate after eating a meal, from the energy cost of physical activity involved 
in sitting, eating and digesting (FAO /WH O/UNU , 1985). Thus, it is often quantified at about 10% 
of total energy expenditure. These metabolic processes are also known by terms such as dietary- 
induced thermoge nesis, specific dynamic action of food and thermic effect of feeding 
(FA O /WH O/UNU, 2004). 
19 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
Age interval 
(months) 
Protein gain 
(g/day) 
Fat mass gain 
(g/day) 
Energy deposited in 
growing tissues (kJ/g) 
Boys 
0-3 months 2.6 19.6 25.1 
3-6 months 2.3 3.9 11.6 
6-9 months 2.3 0.5 6.2 
9-12 months 1.6 1.7 11.4 
G irls 
0-3 months 2.2 19.7 26.2 
3-6 months 1.9 5.8 15.6 
6-9 months 2.0 0.8 7.4 
9-12 months 1.8 1.1 9.8 
G ross energy equivalents: 1g protein = 23.6kJ (5.65 kcal); 1g fat = 38.7kJ (9.25kcal) 
Source: 1Butte (2005) 
G rowth 
The energy cost of growth includes two com ponen ts: the energy value of the tissue or 
product formed and the energy cost of synthesizing it. Growth is a com ponen t that is often 
included in total energy expenditure among children to account for the small increm ent of stored 
cell energy, which is about 2 kcal per gram of weight gain (FA O /W HO/UNU, 2004) required for 
growth and development (< 2% of total energy requirement) (Davies, 1992). Table 1.2 shows the 
protein and fat gains as well as the energy deposited in infants aged below 1 year old. 
Although the energy requirement for growth relative to maintenance is sm all, except for the 
first months of life, satisfactory growth is a sensitive indicator of whether needs are being met. 
To determ ine the energy cost of growth, the energetics of growth mu st be understood and 
satisfactory growth velocities must be defined. Except in the case of young infants and during 
lactation, the estimates of energy cost are not very critical, since human growth is a slow  process, 
taking up a small proportion of the energy requirement (FAO/WHO/UNU, 1985). 
Table 1.2: Energy content of tissue deposition of infants 1 below 1 year old 
20 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
Pregnancy and lactation 
During pregnancy, extra energy is needed for the growth of the foetus, placenta and various 
m aternal tissues, such as in the uterus, breasts and fat stores, as well as for changes in maternal 
metabolism and the increase in maternal effort at rest and during p hysical activity 
(FA O /WH O/UNU, 2004). 
The energy cost of lactation has two compon ents: 1) the energy content of hum an milk 
secreted and 2) the energy required to produce milk. Well-nourished lactating women can derive 
part of this additional requirement from  body fat stores accumu lated during pregnancy 
(FA O /WH O/UNU, 2004). 
1.3 Energy deficiencies and excesses 
Inadequate energy intake 
By compa ring the distribution of dietary energy supply with per caput energy requirements 
in different countries, two types of food inadequacy measures are provided, namely the prevalence 
and the intensity of food inadequacy. The prevalence measure is concerned with the proportion 
and number of people who have inadequate access to food, i.e. who se access falls short of a 
specified cut-off point; while the estimates of intensity, is to assess by how far access to food falls 
short of requirement (FAO, 1996). 
Energy deficiency can be acute or chronic. Acute energy deficiency is by nature “episodic”, 
and characterized by a state of negative energy balance, in which the energy expenditure is greater 
than energy intake. Under these conditions, there is a progressive loss of body weight, along with 
changes in the pattern of energy expenditure, in an attempt by the body to achieve a new but 
lower plane of energy equilibrium. If the energy deficiency persists, further weight loss occurs 
along with deterioration in health ultimately leading to death. 
On the other hand, chronic energy deficiency (CED) is a “steady state”, due to inadequate 
food energy over a lifetime. Individuals with CED could be in energy balance, although their 
anthropom etric parameters may be less than desirable. This state is achieved by the presence of 
low body weight and fat stores, but the individual’s health is normal and the body’s physiological 
function is not compromised to the extent that the individual is unable to lead an economically 
productive life. There is good evidence to show that individuals with CED are less productive and 
that the CED state is associated with higher morbidity and mortality. In addition, the steady state 
referred to above must be appreciated as a theoretical one, subject to periodic fluctuations of 
physiological and environme nt, such as the menstrual cycle and seasons. A high incidence of 
LBW babies has been reported in mothers with low pre-pregnant body mass index (BMI). Milder 
energy-nutrient deficiency leads to stunting, and is also associated with several functional and 
behavioural consequences. From a population viewpoint, it is CED that is important to prevent and 
address. 
21 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
Many factors impact significantly on energy intake and food availability. Environmen tal 
factors, such as w ater resources, arable lands and climate change; governm ent policy, economy, 
as well as social culture may influence food intake (Turral, Burke and F aurès, 2011). Individual 
factors, such as sociodemographic characteristics, acculturation, knowledge and skills, may also 
be significantly associated with energy intake and food availability of individual (FNB, 2013). 
Excess energy intake 
Excessive energy intake and positive energy balance are conditioned by adequate availability 
of food energy and a sedentary lifestyle, accompanied by marketing strategies which stimulate 
over-consumption of highly palatable energy dense foods. Developmen t in m any societies in 
transition is associated with the adoption of a “w estern” lifestyle. This process is shifting the 
nutrition-related disease burden away from under-nutrition and towards death and disability 
related to energy excess and positive energy balance. 
Social factors, such as income, education, me dia or advertising, access to information and 
cultural beliefs, biological factors associated to a genetic predisposition and metabolic changes 
associated to diet and physical activity are the m ain conditioning factors linked to the rising 
prevalence of positive energy balance and excessive energy stores. Environmental factors, such 
as physical environment, including the workplace, school, housing area; safety, such as lighting, 
maintenance of sports facilities, and perception about criminal rate; as well as availability of and 
accessibility to facilities, such as gym, sports equipment or field, or the lack thereof, may also be 
associated to positive energy balance and excessive energy stores (King & Sallis, 2009). 
The non-fatal but debilitating health problems associated with chronic energy excess and 
obesity include respiratory difficulties, chronic muscle-skeletal problems, skin problems  and 
infertility. The m ore life-threatening, chronic health problems fall into four main areas: (a) 
condition associated with insulin resistance, namely diabetes mellitus type 2, (b) cardiovascular 
problems including hypertension, stroke and coronary heart disease, (c) certain types of cancers 
mainly the hormonal-related and large bowel cancers, and (d) gallbladder disease. 
1.4   Dietary sources of energy 
Energy for metabolic and physiological functions of humans is derived from the chemical 
energy bound in food carbohydrates, fats, proteins and alcohol, which act as substrates or fuels. 
Each of these macronutrients has num erous sub-types with specific attributes in terms of energy 
delivery and potential health effects. The gross and met abolizable energy contents of 
macronutrients in their natural forms are well established. The sources of energy is carbohydrates, 
fat and protein with physiological fuel values of 4, 9, 4 kcal/g (16.7, 37.7, 16.7 kJ/g), respectively. 
Ethanol has a caloric value of 7 kcal/g (29.3 kJ/g).  The energy value of a food or diet is calculated 
by applying these factors to the amount of substrates determined by chem ical analysis, or 
estimated from appropriate food composition tables (FAO/WHO/UNU, 2004). 
22 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
The Joint WHO/ FAO  Expert Consultation on diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic 
diseases (WHO , 2003) recommends  that contribution of macronutrients to total daily energy 
intake (TEI) should be within these ranges: total carbohydrate 55 – 75%, total fat 15 – 30% and 
protein 10 – 15%. On the other hand, the IOM (2002) calculated an acceptable macronutrient 
distribution range (AMDR) for carbohydrate, fat and protein to be 45 – 65%, 20 – 35%, and 10 
– 35% of energy, respectively. In 2005, the Technical Sub com mittee o n Energy and 
M acronutrients had adopted the WHO  (2003) recommendation with slight modifications for the 
RN I M alaysia 2005, i.e. total carbohydrate 55 – 70%TEI, total fat 20 – 30 %TEI and protein 10 – 
15%TEI. Howe ver, the TSC  has reviewed more current evidence and recom m ends that 
contribution of macronutrients towards total daily energy intake of the Malaysian adult population 
should be as follows: carbohydrates 50 – 65%TEI, fat 25 – 30%TEI, and protein 10 – 20%TEI. 
1.5 Factors affecting energy requirement 
In view of the fact that energy requirement is determined from energy expenditure, it is 
therefore affected by the factors that affect basal metabolic rate and physical activity, which are 
the m ajor componen ts of energy expenditure. The FAO /WHO /UNU (19 85) report has provided 
details of these factors as discussed below. Some other factors affecting basal metabolic rate are 
ethnicity, body composition, body size, the presence of disease, climate/tem perature and altitude, 
dietary com position, pregnancy, menstrual cycle, emotion, horm one, nutritional status, 
drugs/medication and stimulants. 
Age 
The most important com ponent of energy expenditure, the basal metabolic rate, depends on 
the mass of metabolically active tissue in the body, the proportion of each tissue in the body, and 
the contribution of each tissue to energy metabolism of the whole body. The changes in body 
com position w ith age, therefore, markedly affect energy requirements, since some  organs of the 
body are much mo re metabolically active than others. Fat-free mass is known  to be the most 
variable factor that influences basal metabolic rate, accounting for approximately 50 - 70% of 
variation w ithin an individual. These differences in body composition in children and adults have 
to be taken into account when calculating the energy requirement of a particular section of the 
population. Basal metabolic rate declines by approximately 1 - 2% per decade after the third 
decade of life (>30 years old), and declines even when body weight remains stable. There are 
also altered activity patterns with age. Children become progressively more active once they are 
able to crawl or walk while the physical activity pattern of adults are usually dominated by the 
nature of their work. 
23 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
Sex 
Men h ave a relatively greater muscle mass than wom en, w hich would tend to reduce their 
BMR w hen expressed in terms of lean body mass, since muscle has a low  met abolic rate. 
How ever, the greater body fat content of wome n means that the observed BMR  per unit total 
body w eight is somewhat lower in w omen. The energy dema nd for physical activity will often 
depen d on the different types of em ploym ent for men and wome n. In children, basal energy 
expenditure on a weight basis differs little between  pre-adolescent boys and girls, but since there 
are differences in body weight and composition from the first few m onths of life, and different 
physical demands is made on boys and girls, their energy requirements are considered separately. 
Individual variations 
In any assessments of the average requirement, both intra- and inter-individual variability 
m ust be recognized. The former results from short-term fluctuations in energy intake and 
expenditure. It has been suggested that within individual variations in intakes are more important 
than between-individual variations, and that the observed inter-individual variations can largely 
be explained in term s of the intra-individual variations. Ho w ever, later evidence supports the 
conclusion that within-subject variations in BMR are small and insignificant, even when energy 
intake and physical activity are uncontrolled. It is also generally recognized that in a group of 
apparently com parable people, there is much inter-individual variation in habitual energy 
expenditure. 
Population variations 
The differences in BMR  betwee n populations of the wo rld are equivocal. Som e studies 
show ed 8-10% lower in the tropics while others suggested no difference in BMR between Indians 
and Europeans provided the subjects were well nourished. Other evidence sugge sts that the 
relationship between BMR  and standard independent variables, such as age, sex and body size 
m ay vary among populations including seasonal variations in BMR  corresponding with diet and/or 
tem perature changes. 
1.6 Setting requirements and recommended intake of energy 
The proposed recommended energy intake for Malaysia is calculated based on the factorial 
met hod suggested by FAO/WH O/UNU  (2004). Although the basic principles set forth in the 1985 
report have withstood the test of time, several modifications were proposed in the FAO/W HO /UNU, 
(2004) report. The IO M (2002/2005) report on Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy was also 
used as a reference by the Technical Sub-Com mittee (TSC) on Energy and Macronutrients. 
The proposed recommendations also adopted EFSA ’s basis of using physical activity levels 
of 1.4, 1.6, 1.8 and 2.0 to reflect low active (sedentary), moderately active, active and very active 
lifestyles (EFSA, 2013); while BMR was calculated using the formulas shown in Table 1.3. 
24 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
Table 1.3: BMR formulas used in calculating Total Energy Expenditure (TEE) 
Age group M ales Females Reference 
1 - 3 years 0.249 W – 0.127 0.244 W – 0.130 Schofield (1985) 
3 - 9 years 0.095 W + 2.110 0.085 W + 2.033 Schofield (1985) 
10 - 12 years 0.0558 W + 3.187 a 0.05444 W + 2.781 b
aPoh et al. (2004); 
bPoh et al. (1999) 
13 - 18 years 0.0558 W + 3.187 0.0534 W + 2.182 Poh et al. (2004) 
19 - 29 years 0.0550 W + 2.480 0.0535 W + 1.994 Ismail et al. (1998) 
30 - 60 years 0.0432 W + 3.112 0.0539 W + 2.147 Ismail et al. (1998) 
> 60 years 0.049 W + 2.459 0.038 W + 2.755 Schofield (1985) 
BMR is expressed in MJ/day, W= body weight in kg. 
Infants 
W hitehead, Paul and Cole (1981) compi led energy intakes of infants from  the literature 
between 1940 up to 1980. These data were later used by the FAO/W HO/UNU 1985 consultation 
to estimate energy requirem ent of infant set at 5% higher than observed intakes to compens ate 
for underestimation of intake. 
Since the 1980’s, even thou gh information on BMR o f infants were available, to estimate 
requirement s from multiples of BMR  was not appropriate because reasonable allowance for 
physical activity were undefined. The FAO/ WHO /UNU (1985) recom m endations were 9 -39% 
higher than those reported by Butte (1996). These discrepancies are not trivial and could lead to 
overfeeding of infants. The current recommendations therefore adopted the FAO/WHO/UN U 
(2004) principles. 
The principle of calculating energy requirements from total energy expenditure (TEE) plus the 
energy needs for growth applies to infants and children of all ages. TEE had been shown to have 
good linear relationship with body we ight (Butte et al., 2000). The TEE predictive equation for 
breast-fed infants by Butte (2005) is as follows: 
TEE (MJ/d) = - 0.635 + 0.388 W (kg) 
This TEE formula is adopted for both breast-fed and formula-fed infants, as the equation for 
form ula-fed infants is considered to be no longer appropriate due to recent significant changes 
in the composition of infant formula, whereby the protein to energy ratio is closer to human milk 
(EFSA , 2013). 
25 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
Energy needs for growth comprises of two  comp onents; nam ely (i) the energy used to 
synthesize growing tissues, and (ii) the energy deposited in those tissues. Hence, energy 
requirement s proposed for infant can be calculated by adding the energy deposited in growing 
tissues (as shown in Table 1.2) to TEE. 
Energy requirement for infants 
Boys 0 -  2 months 470 kcal/ day or 1.97 MJ/day 
3 -  5 months 540 kcal/ day or 2.28 MJ/day 
6 -  8 months 630 kcal/ day or 2.65 MJ/day 
9 - 11 months 720 kcal/ day or 3.02 MJ/day 
G irls 0 -  2 months 420 kcal/ day or 1.75 MJ/day 
3 -  5 months 500 kcal/ day or 2.11 MJ/day 
6 -  8 months 570 kcal/ day or 2.39 MJ/day 
9 - 11 months 660 kcal/ day or 2.74 MJ/day 
Children and adolescents 
There was very little information available in 198 1 on total energy expenditure (TEE) of 
children. The paucity of information on time allocated to different activities and energy cost of such 
activities, did not allow reliable estimates of TEE in children below 10 years of age.  Consequently, 
estimates of energy requireme nts for 1-10 years old were derived from a review of published 
dietary intake data involving some 6,500 children, mostly from developed countries (Ferro-Luzzi 
& Durnin 1981). The FAO/WHO /UNU (1985) Consultation felt the need to increase the reported 
energy intake by 5% to accommodate a desirable level of physical activity. 
The estimation of energy requirements  is based on energy expenditure expressed as 
multiples of BM R rather than energy intake data (FAO/WHO/UNU, 2004). BMR for boys and girls 
of a given age and weight were predicted with the mathematical equations derived by Schofield 
(1985). The additional energy expended during the day was calculated based on the assume d 
energy cost of activities performed  by the children and adolescents in developing countries. Extra 
allowance for growth was assume d to be 5.6 kcal (23.4 kJ) per gram of expected weight gain. This 
corresponds to about 3%, of the daily energy requirement at 1 year of age, with a gradual decrease 
to about 1% at 15 years (Torun et al., 1996). 
According to the FAO /WHO /UNU (2004) method of estimating energy requirements for 
children and adolescents, energy needs of children and adolescents were also calculated from 
measurem ents of energy expenditure and the energy needs of growth. Torun (2001) analysed a 
large number of studies on TEE, growth and habitual activity pattern of children and adolescents 
in different parts of the world for the FAO/WHO/UNU ex pert consultation. Studies using either 
doubly-labelled water (DLW) or heart-rate monitoring (HRM) were included in the evaluation. 
26 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
As mentioned earlier, the energy needs for growth comprises that used to synthesize growing 
tissues and energy deposited in those tissues. The energy spent in tissue synthesis is part of TEE 
m easured with either DLW or HRM.  Hence, only the energy deposited in growing tissues was 
added to TEE in order to calculate energy requirements (FAO/WHO/UN U, 2004). 
The EFSA  (2013) Scientific Opinion on Dietary Reference Values for Energy adopted the 
equation of Henry (2005) for estimation of resting energy expenditure (REE) and the following PAL 
values: 1.4 for the 1-3 years age group; 1.4, 1.6 and 1.8 for >3-<10 years; and 1.4, 1.6, 1.8 and 
2.0 for 10-18 years. Energy expend iture for growth is accounted for by a 1% increase in PAL 
values for each age group. 
The proposed recommendations adopted the FAO/WHO/UNU (2004) method for estimating 
energy requirem ents, and employed the PAL values suggested by EFSA (2013) in its calculations. 
Fo r children aged 1-9 years, BM R was calculated based on Schofield (1985). For adolescents 
aged 10 - 18 years, the BMR values was calculated from Poh et al. (2004), and Poh et al. (1999) 
for girls aged 10 - 12 years. Body weights used for calculation of BMR was from WHO ( 2006; 
2007) median weight-for-age for children up to 10 years, and we ight equivalent to WHO (2007) 
m edian BMI-for-age calculated based on median height from the National He alth and Morbidity 
Survey (NHMS ) 2015 for adolescents aged 10 years and above. The energy intakes recommend ed 
by the TSC for each group are shown by age groups in each subtopic below and summar ized in 
Table 1.4. 
Boys 
Low 
Active 
Moderately 
Active Active Very 
Active 
PAL 1.4 PAL 1.6 PAL 1.8 PAL 2.0 
Girls 
Low 
Active 
Moder ately 
Active Active Very 
Active 
PAL 1.4 PAL 1.6 PAL 1.8 PAL 2.0 
C hildren 
1 - 3 years 980 900 
(4.12) (3.78) 
4 - 6 years 1300 1490 1670 1210 1380 1560 
(5.44) (6.22) (7.00) (5.06) (5.79) (6.51) 
7 - 9 years 1530 1750 1970 1410 1610 1810 
(6.40) (7.31) (8.22) (5.88) (6.72) (7.56) 
Adolescents 
10 - 12 years 1690 1930 2170 2420 1500 1710 1920 2140 
(7.08) (8.09) (9.10) (10.11) (6.26) (7.15) (8.05) (8.94) 
13 - 15years 1930 2210 2480 2760 1580 1810 2040 2260 
(8.08) (9.24) (10.39) (11.55) (6.62) (7.57) (8.52) (9.46) 
16 - 18 years 2050 2340 2640 2930 1660 1890 2130 2370 
(8.58) (9.81) (11.04) (12.26) (6.94) (7.93) (8.92) (9.91) 
Note: For children aged 4 – 6 years, sim ilar to those aged 1 – 3 years, PAL 1.4 is recomm ended for the general 
population. For children aged 7 years and above, PAL of 1.6 (i.e. moderately active) is recomme nded for the 
gen eral population. For individuals, energy recommendation should be based on individual PAL. 
Table 1.4: Energy Requirements for Children and Adolescents in kcal/day (MJ /d) 
27 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
Adults and elderly 
The FAO/W H O/UNU Expert Consultation (1985) adopted the principle of relying on estimates 
of energy expenditure rather than energy intake from dietary surveys to estimate the energy 
requiremen ts of adults. Since the largest component of total energy expenditure (TEE) is the 
BMR , which can be measured with accuracy under standardised conditions, the 1985 Report 
adopted in principle for the sake of simplicity, all components of TEE as multiples of BMR also 
know n as PAL approach. Besides BMR, other compon ents of energy expenditure such as 
occupational activities, discretionary activities and residual time have been identified and evaluated 
to derive total energy requirements. 
The FA O/WHO/ UNU (2004) report maintained the 198 5 Expert Consultation’s principle of 
using estimates of energy expenditure to estimate the energy requireme nts of adults. The use of 
techniques such as DLW  and HRM  confirmed the large discrepancy of TEE amo ng adults and 
hence of energy requirements, that was previously reported by tim e-mot ion studies. Growth is 
no longer an energy-demanding factor in adulthood, and BM R is relatively constant amon g 
population groups of a given age and gender. Consequently, habitual physical activity and body 
w eight are the m ain determinants for the diversity in energy requireme nts of adult populations 
w ith different lifestyles. 
TEE was estimated though factorial estima tion that combine d the time allocated to habitual 
activities, and the energy cost of those activities. To account for differences in body size and 
comp osition, the energy cost of activities was calculated as a multiple of BMR per minute, or 
physical activity ratio (PAR), and the 24-hour requirement was expressed as a multiple of BMR 
per 24 hours, by using the physical activity level (PAL) value. Energy requirements are calculated 
by multiplying the PAL value by the energy equivalent of the corresponding BMR. 
The EF SA, (2013) Scientific Opinion on Dietary Reference Values for Energy adopted the 
equation of Henry (2005) for estimation of resting energy expenditure (REE) of adults and the PAL 
values of 1.4 1.6, 1.8 and 2.0 to reflect low active (sedentary), moder ately active, active and very 
active lifestyles, respectively. The REE was calculated based on individual body heights measu red 
in nationally representative surveys in 13 EU countries, and corresponding individual body masses 
calculated to yield a BMI of 22 kg/m 2.
The TSC recommendati on for energy requirements for adults and elderly are based on PAL 
values of 1.4, 1.6, 1.8 and 2.0 and the body weight equivalent to BMI 22.0 calculated based on 
NH MS  2015 median height. The BMR for adult Malaysians (19-59 years) is derived from local 
studies (Ism ail et al., 1998); while for the elderly ≥60 years, the Schofield (1985) equations were 
used (Table 1.5). 
28 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
Table 1.5: Energy Requirements for Adults and Elderly in kcal/day (MJ/d) 
Low  Active Moderately Active Active Very Active 
PAL 1.4 PAL 1.6 PAL 1.8 PAL 2.0 
Males 
19 - 29 years 1960 (8.20) 2240 (9.37) 2520 (10.54) 2800 (11.71) 
30 - 59 years 1920 (8.02) 2190 (9.17) 2470 (10.31) 2740 (11.46) 
≥60 years 1780 (7.43) 2030 (8.49) 2280 (9.55) 2540 (10.61) 
Fem ales 
19 - 29 years 1610 (6.75) 1840 (7.72) 2080 (8.68) 2310 (9.65) 
30 - 59 years 1660 (6.94) 1900 (7.94) 2130 (8.93) 2370 (9.92) 
≥60 years 1550 (6.49) 1770 (7.42) 1990 (8.34) 2220 (9.27) 
Note: For adult and elderly age groups, PAL of 1.6 (i.e. moderately active) is recomm ended for the general 
population. For individuals, energy recommendation should be based on individual PAL. 
The requiremen ts for groups with different body weights and level of physical activity are 
show n in Appendix 1.1 - 1.4. It must however be emphasized that these values are intended to 
be general guidelines. It may be useful to make adjustments according to the characteristics of 
the population concerned. 
Pregnancy 
The FAO/W HO/ U NU  (1985) recommendat ions for pregnancy were based on a general 
acceptance that total energy needs of pregnancy were estimated at 335MJ (80,000 kcal) or about 
1.2 MJ or 285 kcal/day.  Mo st reports published after 1985 have recommend ed lowe r increme nts 
at 0.84 MJ/day or 200 kcal/day for healthy wom en with reduced activity (Prentice et al., 1996). 
Dietary intake during pregnancy must provide the energy that will result in the full-term 
delivery of a healthy newborn baby of adequate size and body composition. The ideal situation is 
that wom en enter pregnancy with a healthy body weight (within the normal BMI range) and good 
nutritional conditions. Therefore, the energy requirements of pregnancy are those neede d for the 
grow th of the fetus, placenta and associated maternal tissues, and for the increased me tabolic 
dem ands of pregnancy, in addition to the energy needed to maintain adequate maternal weight, 
body comp osition and physical activity throughout the gestational period. Special considerations 
m ust be made for women who are under- or overweight when they enter pregnancy as they are 
at risk of poor maternal and fetal outcomes (Han et al. 2011; McDonald et al. 2010). 
Additional energy requirements for pregnancy arises from increases in maternal and feto- 
placental tissue mass, the rise in energy expenditure attributable to increased BMR  and changes 
in the energy cost of physical activity. Gestational weight gain is the major determinant of 
29 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
increment al energy needs during pregnancy (SACN, 2011). The extra amount of energy required 
during pregnancy was calculated in association with a mean gestational we ight gain of 12 kg by 
using factorial approaches (FAO/WHO /UNU, 2004), with the assumption that pre-pregnancy BMI 
is within the healthy range. Presently, there are an increasing proportion of w om en entering 
pregnancy at a weight exceeding healthy range; and for those who are obese, gestational weight 
gain must be closely monitored and their additional energy requirem ent during pregnancy should 
be modified accordingly. 
The proposed recommendation adopts FAO/WHO /U NU  (2004) recomm endations with slight 
adjustment, and is similar also to EFSA (2013) recommenda tions. 
Additional energy requirements during pregnancy 
1st trimester + 80 kcal/ day or   + 0.33 MJ/day 
2nd trimester + 280 kcal/ day or   + 1.17 MJ/day 
3rd trimester + 470 kcal/ day or   + 1.97 MJ/day 
Lactation 
The FA O /WHO /UNU (1985) recommendation for lactation were based on the median milk 
consum ption of breast-fed Swedish infants for the first 6 months. It was assumed that milk energy 
w as 2.9 kJ/g or 0.7 kcal/g and the efficiency of conversion of dietary to milk energy was 80%. 
Further more, it was assumed that the average women would start lactation with 150MJ (36,000 
kcal) of additional fat reserves laid down during pregnancy and that these would be used to 
subsidize the cost of lactation over the first 6 months thus yielding about 0.84MJ/day or 200 
kcal/day (Prentice et al., 1996). 
The energy requirement of a lactating woma n is defined as the level of energy intake from 
food that will balance the energy expenditure needed to maintain a body size and composition, a 
level of physical activity, and a breast milk production, which are consistent with good health for 
the w oman and her child, and that will allow performing economi cally necessary and socially 
desirable activities. To operationalize this definition, the energy needed to produce an appropriate 
volume of milk must be added to the woman’s habitual energy requirement, assuming that she 
resumes her usual level of physical activity soon after giving birth. The energy cost of lactation 
is determ ined by the amount of milk that is produced and secreted, its energy content, and the 
efficiency with which dietary energy is converted to milk energy. 
Postpartum loss of body weight is usually highest in the first three months, and generally 
greater among women who practice exclusive breastfeeding, but the extent to which energy is 
imm obilized to support lactation depends on the gestational weight gain and the nutritional status 
of the mother. Thus, the recomme ndations for lactating wo men  to a large part depend on the 
w omen’s nutritional status. 
30 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
For wom en who feed their infants exclusively with breast milk during the first six months of 
life, the mean energy cost over the six mo nth period is 2.8 MJ/day (675 kcal/day) calculated 
based on mean milk production of 807g milk/ day x energy density of milk of 2.8 kJ/day at 0.80 
ene rgetic efficiency of milk. Fat stores accumulated during pregnancy may cover part of the 
additional energy needed in the first few months of lactation. Assuming an energy factor of 27.2 
M J/kg, the rate of weight loss in well-nourished women (0.8 kg/month) would correspond to the 
m obilization of 27.2 x 0.8 kg/month = 21.8 MJ/month, or 0.72 MJ/day (170 kcal/day) from body 
energy stores (Butte & King 2005). This amount of energy can be deducted from the 2.8 MJ (675 
kcal) per day needed during the first six months of lactation, thus reducing the additional energy 
requirement  during lactation to 2.1 MJ/day (500 kcal/day). How ever, this will vary depending on 
the amount of fat deposited during pregnancy, as well as the lactation pattern and duration. 
From the age of six month onwards, when infants are partially breast-fed and milk production 
is on average 550 g/day; hence, the energy cost imposed by lactation is 1.9 25MJ/day (460 
kcal/day). Volumes of breast milk secreted during this stage are highly variable as they depend 
on the rates of m ilk production, which varies among women and populations (FA O/WHO/UNU, 
2004) as we ll as the infant’s energy intake from compleme ntary foods (EF SA, 2013). Thus, 
recommen dation on additional ene rgy intake for women lactating beyond the first six months 
after birth is not proposed here. Energy intake required to support breastfeeding during the second 
six months will be modified by maternal body composition and the breast milk intake of the infant. 
The proposed recommendation adopts the FAO/WHO/UNU ( 2004) recommenda tion, which 
is the same as EFSA (2013) recommendation. 
Additional energy requirements during lactation 
First 6 months + 500 kcal/ day or   + 2.09 MJ/day 
Discussions on Revised Energy Requirements for Malaysia 
The recomm endations of the TSC on Energy and Macronutrients for energy requirements for 
Malaysians according to life stages are shown in Table 2.6. The requirements were derived based 
on the principles suggested in the FAO/WHO /UNU (2004) report using reliable measureme nts of 
total energy expenditure obtained from  various age-groups as w ell as in special physiological 
status such as pregnancy and lactation. To derive requirements, the body weights we re obtained 
from WHO references based on local m edian height data and the physical activity level (PAL) 
values adopted from the EF SA  (2013) recommendation for energy. With the exception of 
adolescents and adults for which local data are available, all BMR values were adopted from the 
Schofield (1985) as per recommended by the FAO/WHO/UNU  report. 
The recom mended energy requirements for Malaysia (2017) are compared to the previous 
energy recommen dations for Malaysia (NCCFN 2005), as well as the reports of IOM (2002/2005) 
and FAO /WH O /UNU  (2004) (Appendix 2.10). For infants, the revised energy requirements has 
been done for four 3-monthly age groups instead of two 6-monthly age groups; and as such were 
not directly comparable to the 2005 recommendations. For toddlers aged 1 - 3 years, the revised 
energy recomm endations are very similar to RNI 2005. 
31 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
For children and older age groups, the main  difference wi th the 2 005 energ y 
recomm endations is that the current recommendations are ma de for various levels of physical 
activity, namely low active (PAL 1.4), moderately active (PAL 1.6), active (PAL 1.8) and very active 
(PAL 2.0). For the purpose of comparison, moderate level of activity (PAL 1.6) was selected. The 
revised energy requirements are generally lower than RNI  2005 by about 8 - 18% , and this is 
especially obvious for the adolescents and adults age groups. In children and elderly, the 
differences are much smaller at between 1 - 10%. 
For pregnancy and lactation, the current energy recomme ndations are ma de in line with the 
FA O/WHO/ UNU (2004) report and EFS A (2013); which is very similar to the 2 005 
recom menda tions. However, the current recommendations also cover additional energy 
requirement s for women in their first trimester of pregnancy, w hereas the 2005 RN I did not have 
any energy recommendations for this group of women. 
Se veral studies have revealed that most Malaysians maintained energy balance on a low 
intake while leading a sedentary lifestyle (Ismail et al ., 2002; Poh et al., 2010). The increasing trend 
in overweight and obesity in urban and rural areas is an indication that it is critical to revisit the 
2005 energy recommendation that was made based on PAL 1.75. The current recommendations 
provide for people with various levels of physical activity, from low to very active. 
32 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
Table 1.6:  Recom m endations for energy requirem ents by life stages and physical activity level 
Age 
Infants 
0 - 2 m onths 4.5 470 (1.9 7) 4.2 420 (1.75) 
3 - 5 m onths 7.0 540 (2.28) 6.4 500 (2.11) 
6 - 8 m onths 8.3 630 (2.65) 7.6 570 (2.39 ) 
9  - 11 m onths 9 .2 720 (3.02) 8.5 660 (2.74) 
PAL 1.4 PAL 1.6 PAL 1.8 PAL 2.0 PAL 1.4 PAL 1.6 PAL 1.8 PAL 2.0 
C hildren 
1 - 3 years 12.2 9 80 (4.12) 11.5 9 00 (3.78) 
4 - 6 years 18.3 1300 (5.44) 149 0 (6.22) 1670 (7.00) 18.2 1210 (5.06) 1380 (5.79 ) 1560 (6.51) 
7 - 9  years 25.4 1530 (6.40) 1750 (7.31) 19 70 (8.22) 25.0 1410 (5.88) 1610 (6.72) 1810 (7.56) 
Adolescents 
10 - 12 years 33.4 169 0 (7.08) 19 30 (8.09 ) 2170 (9 .10) 2420 (10.11) 35.4 1500 (6.26) 1710 (7.15) 19 20 (8.05) 2140 (8.9 4) 
13 - 15years 49 .6 19 30 (8.08) 2210 (9 .24) 2480 (10.39 ) 2760 (11.55) 46.5 1580 (6.62) 1810 (7.57) 2040 (8.52) 2260 (9 .46) 
16 - 18 years 59 .2 2050 (8.58) 2340 (9 .81) 2640 (11.04) 29 30 (12.26) 50.3 1660 (6.9 4) 189 0 (7.9 3) 2130 (8.9 2) 2370 (9 .9 1) 
Adults 
19  - 29  years 61.4 19 60 (8.20) 2240 (9 .37) 2520 (10.54) 2800 (11.71) 52.9 1610 (6.75) 1840 (7.72) 2080 (8.68) 2310 (9 .65) 
30 - 59  years 60.6 19 20 (8.02) 219 0 (9 .17) 2470 (10.31) 2740 (11.46) 52.2 1660 (6.9 4) 19 00 (7.9 4) 2130 (8.9 3) 2370 (9 .9 2) 
≥60 years 58.1 1780 (7.43) 2030 (8.49 ) 2280 (9 .55) 2540 (10.61) 49 .5 1550 (6.49 ) 1770 (7.42) 19 9 0 (8.34) 2220 (9 .27) 
Pregnancy 
1st trim ester +80 (+0.33) 
2nd trim ester +280 (+1.17) 
3rd trim ester +470 (+1.9 7) 
Lactation 
1st six m onths + 500 (+2.09 ) 
M ales 
Reference 
body w eight 1
(kg) 
E stim ated E nergy Requirem ents 2
kcal/day (M J/d) 
Reference 
body w eight 1
(kg) 
E stim ated E nergy Requirem ents 2
kcal/day (M J/d) 
Fem ales 
1 C hildren 0-9  years: W H O  w eight-for-age m edian; Adolescents 10-18 years: m ass equivalent to W H O  BM I-for-age m edian based on NH M S 2015 m edian heights; Adults: m ass equivalent to BM I 22.0 
based on NH M S 2015 m edian heights. 
2 F or children aged 4 – 6 years, PAL 1.4 is recom m ended for the general population. F or children above 7 years, adolescents and adults, PAL of 1.6 (i.e. m oderately active) is recom m ended for the general 
population. F or individuals, energy recom m endation should be based on individual PAL. 
33 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
1.7 Research recommendations 
The following priority areas of research are recommended: 
• Data on physical activity levels of different activities (duration, intensity and frequency) in all 
age groups. 
• M ore basal metabolic rate measurements using strict criteria in order to generate predictive 
equations in all age groups, particularly in children under 10 years and in the elderly above 
60 years of age. 
• To determine whether ethnicity or habitation in a tropical environme nt influences BMR. 
• C ritical re-assessme nt of available data, particularly on the extent of intra- and inter-individual 
variability. 
• U se doubly-labelled water method to validate other conventional techniques in estimating 
energy expenditure, particularly in infant, children and adolescents. 
• There is a need to update and expand data bank on the energy cost of a range of activities 
undertaken in real-life conditions by children and adults. 
34 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
1.8 References 
Ainsworth BE, Haskell WL, Herrm ann SD, Meckes N, Bassett DR Jr, Tudor-Locke C, Greer JL, 
Vezina J, Whitt-Glover MC, Leon AS (2011). Compendium of Physical Activities: a second 
update of codes and MET values. Med Sci Sports Exerc 43(8):1575-1581. 
Butte NF (1996). Energy requirements of infants. Eur J Clin Nutr 50:S24-S36. 
Butte NF (2005). Energy requirements of infants. Public Health Nutr 8, 953-967. 
Butte NF & King JC (2005). Energy requirements during pregnancy and lactation. Public Health 
Nu tr 8(7a), 1010-1027. 
Butte NF , Wong W W, Hopk inson JM, Heinz CJ, Mehta NR & Smi th EO  (2000). Energy 
requirem ents derived from total energy expenditure and energy deposition during the first 
2 years of life. Am J Clin Nutr 72:1558-1569. 
Davies PSW (1992). Energy requirements and energy expend iture in infancy. Eur J Clin Nutr 
46(Suppl): S29-35. 
EFS A (2013). Scientific opinion on dietary reference values for energy. EFSA Panel on Dietetic 
Products, Nutrition and Allergies (NDA), European Food Safety Authority. EF SA  Journal 
11(1):3005. doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2013.3005 
F AO  (1996). The Sixth World Food Survey. Food and Agriculture Organisation, Rome. 
F AO/WHO/ UNU (1985). Expert Consultation on Energy and Protein Requireme nts. WHO Technical 
Report Series No. 724. 
F AO /WH O /UNU (2004). Human Energy Requirements. Report of a Joint FAO/WH O/UNU Expert 
Con sultation.  Food and Nutrition Technical Report Series, Food and Agriculture Organization, 
Rom e. 
Fer ro-Luzzi A & Durnin JVGA (1981). The assessment of human energy intake and expenditure: 
a critical review of the recent literature. Food and Agriculture Organisation, Rome (Docume nt 
ESN : FAO/WHO/U NU /EPR/81/9). 
FN B (2013). Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program: Exam ining the Evidence to Define 
Ben efit Adequacy. Caswell JA & Yaktine AL (Eds.) Was hington D.C.: National Academies 
Press. 
Han Z, Mulla S, Beyene J, Liao G  & McDonald SD (2011). Maternal underweight and the risk of 
preterm birth and low birth weight: a systematic review and meta-analyses. Int J Epidemiol 
40: 65-101. 
He nry CJK (2005). Basal metabolic rate studies in humans: measuremen t and development of new 
equations. Public Health Nutrition 8(7a):1133-52. 
35 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
IO M  (2002/2005). Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrates, Fiber, Fat, Protein and 
Ami no Acids (Ma cronutrients). Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine. National 
Academy Press, Washington D.C. Chapter 5. 
Ismail MN, Ng KK, Chee SS, Roslee R & Zawiah H (1998). Predictive equations for the estimation 
of basal metabolic rate in Malaysian adults. Mal J Nutr 4: 81-90. 
Ism ail MN, Chee S S, Nawawi H, Yussoff K, Lim TK & James W PT (2002). Obesity in Malaysia. 
Ob esity Reviews 3(3):203-208. 
Jame s WPT & Schofield EC  (1990). H uman energy requirem ents. A manual for planners and 
nutritionists. FAO and Oxford University Press; Oxford, UK. 
King AC & Sallis JF (2009). Why and how to improve physical activity prom otion: lessons from 
behavioral science and related fields. Prev Med 49:286-288. 
McD onald SD, Han Z, Mulla S & Beyene K (2010). Overweight and obesity in mothers and risk of 
preterm birth and low birth weight infants: system atic review and meta-analyses. BMJ 341: 
c3428. 
National C oordinating Com mittee on Food and Nut rition (N CCFN ) 2005. M alaysian 
Recommended Nutrient Intakes. Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
National Coordinating Commi ttee on Food and Nutrition (NCCFN).  2010. Malaysian Dietary 
Gu idelines 2010. Putrajaya: Ministry of Health Malaysia. 
Poh BK, Ism ail MN, Zawiah H & Henry CJK (1999). Predictive equations for the estimation of 
basal m etabolic rate in Malaysian adolescents. Mal J Nutr 5: 1-14. 
Po h BK, Ismail MN , O ng HF, Norimah AK & Safiah MY (2004). BM R predictive equations for 
Ma laysian adolescents aged 12 - 18 years. F inal Report for IRPA 06-02-02-0096 Research 
Project. Dep artment of Nutrition and Dietetics, Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, Universiti 
Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
Poh BK, Safiah MY, Tahir A, Siti Haslinda N, Siti Norazlin N, Norimah AK, Wan Ma nan W M, 
Mirnalini K, Zalilah MS, Azmi MY, Fatimah S (2010). Physical activity pattern and energy 
expenditure of Malaysian adults: findings from the Malaysian adult nutrition survey (MANS) . 
Ma l J Nutr 16:13-37. 
Prentice AM, Spaaij CJK, Goldberg GR, Poppitt SD, van Raaij JMA, Totton M, Swann D & Black 
AE (1996). Energy requirements of pregnant and lactating women. Eur J Clin Nutr 50: S82- 
S111. 
SA CN  (2011). Dietary Reference Values for Energy. London: Scientific Advisory Committee on 
Nutrition. 
36 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
Samitz G, Egger M, and Zwahlen M (2011).  Domains of physical activity and all-cause mortality: 
systema tic review and dose-response me ta-analysis of cohort studies. International Journal 
of Epidemiology 40 (5):1382-1400. 
Schofield W N (1985). Predicting basal metabolic rate, new standards and review of previous 
work. Hum Nut r Clin Nutr 39 C (Suppl. 1): 5-41. 
Torun B (2001). Energy requirements of children and adolescents. Background paper prepared 
for the joint FAO /WHO /UNU Expert Consultation on Energy in Human Nutrition. 
Torun B, Davies PSW, Livingstone MB E, Paolisso M, Sackett R & Spurr GB (19 9 6).  Energy 
requirements and dietary energy recom m endations for children and adolescents. 1 to 18 
years old. Eur J Clin Nutr 50:S37-S81. 
Turral H , Burke J & Faurès JM (2011). Climate change, water and food security. Ro me : Food and 
Agriculture Organization. 
Whitehead RG, Paul AA & Cole TJ (1981).  A critical analysis of me asured food energy intakes 
during infancy and early childhood in com parison with current international 
recom me ndations. J Hum Nutr 35:339-348. 
WH O  (2003). Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases: Re port of a Joint WHO/FAO 
Expert Consultation. Geneva: World Health Organization. 
WH O  (2006). WHO chi ld grow th standards: length/height for age, weight-for-age, weight-for- 
length, w eight-for-height and body mass index-for-age, methods and development. Gen eva: 
Wor ld Health Organization. 
WH O  (2007). Growth reference data for 5-19 years. Geneva: W orld Health Organization. 
37 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
Appendix 1.1 Schofield equations for predicting basal metabolic rate from body weight 1
No. kcal/ day Age range 
(years) M J/ day s.e.e. as.e.e. a
W = body weight in kg 
1 F AO /WHO/UNU (2004); Schofield (1985) 
a standard error of estimate 
BMR  is expressed in MJ/day, W= body weight in kg. 
1Ism ail et al., (1998) 
Males 
0 - 3 162 59.512 W – 30.4 70 0.249 W – 0.127 0.292 
3 - 10 338 22.706 W + 504.3 67 0.095 W + 2.110 0.280 
10 - 18 734 17.686 W + 658.2 105 0.074 W + 2.754 0.411 
18 - 30 2879 15.057 W + 692.2 153 0.063 W + 2.896 0.641 
30 - 60 646 11.472 W + 873.1 167 0.048 W + 3.653 0.700 
> 60 50 11.711W + 587.7 164 0.049 W + 2.459 0.686 
Females 
0 - 3 137 58.317 W – 31.1 59 0.244 W – 0.130 0.246 
3 - 10 413 20.315 W + 485.9 70 0.085 W + 2.033 0.292 
10 - 18 575 13.384 W + 692.6 111 0.056 W + 2.898 0.466 
18 - 30 829 14.818 W + 486.6 119 0.062 W + 2.036 0.497 
30 - 60 372 8.126 W + 845.6 111 0.034 W + 3.538 0.465 
> 60 38 9.082 W + 658.5 108 0.038 W + 2.755 0.451 
Male 
18 - 30 0.0550 W + 2.480 0.644 0.0363 
30 - 60 0.0432 W + 3.112 0.501 0.0189 
Female 
18 - 30 0.0535 W + 1.994 0.511 0.0263 
30 - 60 0.0539 W + 2.147 0.519 0.0200 
Appendix 1.2 BMR predictive equations for adult Malaysians 1
Age group (years) Form ula r SE M ean 
38 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
BMR is expressed in kJ/day, W = body weight in kg 
1 Poh et al. (1999)     
a standard error 
Appendix 1.3 BMR predictive equations for Malaysian adolescents aged 10 – 15 years 1
Age groups Regression equations 
No. of 
data 
points 
r2 s.e. a
Boys 
11 years BMR = 86.42 W + 2097 83 0.62 390 
12 years BMR = 93.45 W + 1899 108 0.64 431 
13 years BMR = 79.75 W + 2377 109 0.66 393 
14 years BMR = 74.65 W + 2487 56 0.54 429 
11 – 15 years BMR = 80.38 W + 2319 360 0.70 417 
Girls 
10 years BMR = 75.29 W + 2118 55 0.62 329 
11 years BMR = 76.66 W + 2124 118 0.66 365 
12 years BMR = 52.46 W + 2846 103 0.47 400 
13 years BMR = 50.86 W + 2736 70 0.43 392 
10 – 14 years BMR = 54.44 W + 2781 353 0.52 405 
BMR is expressed in kJ/day, W = body weight in kg, S = sex: where 1 = female, 2 = male 
1 Poh et al. (2004) 
a standard error of estimate 
Appendix 1.4 BMR predictive equations for Malaysian adolescents aged 12 – 18 years 1
G roups Regression equations 
No. 
of data 
points 
r2 s.e.e. a
Boys BMR = 55.8W + 3187 269 0.54 605 
Girls BMR = 53.4W + 2182 303 0.50 498 
Combined BMR = 54.9W + 1119.6S + 2116 572 0.81 551 
39 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
Appendix 1.5 Oxford equations for predicting BMR 1
Age range 
(years) MJ/ day kcal/ day SE a n r
M ales 
0 -  3 0.255 W – 0.141 61.0 W – 33.7 0.255 277 0.954 
3 - 10 0.0937 W + 2.15 23.3 W + 514 0.328 289 0.827 
10 - 18 0.0769 W + 2.43 18.4 W + 581 0.566 863 0.861 
18 - 30 0.0669 W + 2.28 16.0 W + 545 0.652 2821 0.760 
30 - 60 0.0592 W + 2.48 14.2 W + 593 0.693 1010 0.742 
> 60 0.0563 W + 2.15 13.5 W + 514 0.685 534 0.776 
Fem ales 
0 -  3 0.246 W – 0.0965 58.9 W + 23.1 0.242 215 0.960 
3 - 10 0.0842 W + 2.12 20.1 W + 507 0.360 403 0.820 
10 - 18 0.0465 W + 3.18 11.1 W + 761 0.525 1063 0.752 
18 - 30 0.0546 W + 2.33 13.1 W + 558 0.564 1664 0.700 
30 - 60 0.0407 W + 2.90 9.74 W + 694 0.581 1023 0.690 
> 60 0.0424 W + 2.38 10.1 W + 569 0.485 334 0.786 
W = body weight in kg 
1 Henry (2005) 
a standard error 
Appendix 1.6 Examples of various activities based on MET values 
Activities M ET s 
Sleeping 1.0 
Sitting quietly and watching television 1.3 
Sitting at a desk 1.3 
Standing quietly, standing in a line 1.3 
Sitting, listening to music or watching a movie in a theatre 1.5 
Sitting, in class-including note-taking or class discussion 1.8 
Standing, reading 1.8 
Fishing from boat or canoe - sitting 2.0 
U pper body exercise- arm ergometer 2.8 
Therapeutic exercise ball - Fitball exercise  2.8 
Cooking, washing dishes, cleaning up - moderate effort 3.3 
W alking, for pleasure, work break 3.5 
Bicycling - leisure, 5.5 mph 3.5 
Cleaning, sweeping - slow, moderate effort 3.8 
Lawn and garden picking fruit off trees, gleaning fruits, picking fruits/ vegetables 4.5 
Rock climbing, rappelling 5.0 
Softball or baseball, fast or slow pitch, general 5.0 
40 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
Source: Ainsworth et al., (2011) 
Activities M ET s 
Tennis, hitting balls, non-game play, moderate effort 5.0 
Volleyball, competitive, in gymnasium 6.0 
Resistance training (weight lifting, free weight, nautilus or universal), power lifting 6.0 
or body building, vigorous effort 
Track and field (e.g., high jump, long jump) 6.0 
Teaching exercise class (e.g., aerobic, water) 6.8 
Dancing aerobic 7.3 
Bicycling leisure, 9.4 mph 8
Running, 5 mph (12 min/ mile) 8.3 
41 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
Age 
Low  Active 
(PAL 1.40) 
kcal/ day M J/ day kcal/ day M J/ day kcal/ day M J/ day kcal/ day M J/ day 24.9 21.0 18.5 
M oderately Active 
(PAL 1.60) 
Active 
(PAL 1.80) 
Very Active 
(PAL 2.00) 
Height (m ) for 
BM I values of 1
1 H eight ranges are presented for each m ean w eight for ease of m aking dietary energy recom m endations to m aintain an adequate BM I based on a population’s m ean height and PAL. F or 
exam ple, the recom m ended m ean energy intake for a m ale population of this age group w ith a m ean height of 1.70m  and a lifestyle w ith a m ean PAL of 1.60, is around 9 .25 M J (2,210 kcal) 
per day, to m aintain an optim um  population m edian BM I of 21.0, w ith an individual range of about 8.81 – 10.13 M J (2,110 – 2,420 kcal) per day, to m aintain the individual BM I lim its of 18.5 – 24.9 .
Appendix 1.7  E nergy requirem ents of adults aged 19 – 29 years in populations w ith different body w eight and four levels of habitual physical activity 
M en (19 - 29 years) 
40 kg 1570 6.55 179 0 7.49 2010 8.42 2240 9 .36 1.27 1.38 1.47 
45 kg 1660 6.9 4 189 0 7.9 3 2130 8.9 2 2370 9 .9 1 1.34 1.46 1.56 
50 kg 1840 7.71 2110 8.81 2370 9 .9 1 2630 11.01 1.42 1.54 1.64 
55 kg 1840 7.71 2110 8.81 2370 9 .9 1 2630 11.01 1.49 1.62 1.72 
60 kg 19 30 8.09 2210 9 .25 249 0 10.40 2760 11.56 1.55 1.69 1.80 
65 kg 2030 8.48 2320 9 .69 2600 10.9 0 289 0 12.11 1.62 1.76 1.87 
70 kg 2120 8.86 2420 10.13 2720 11.39 3030 12.66 1.68 1.83 1.9 5 
75 kg 2210 9 .25 2530 10.57 2840 11.89 3160 13.21 1.74 1.89 2.01 
80 kg 2300 9 .63 2630 11.01 29 60 12.38 329 0 13.76 1.79 1.9 5 2.08 
85 kg 239 0 10.02 2740 11.45 3080 12.88 3420 14.31 1.85 2.01 2.14 
9 0 kg 249 0 10.40 2840 11.89 3200 13.37 3550 14.86 1.9 0 2.07 2.21 
W om en (19 - 29 years) 
40 kg 1380 5.79 1580 6.61 1780 7.44 19 80 8.27 1.27 1.38 1.47 
45 kg 1470 6.16 1680 7.04 189 0 7.9 2 2100 8.80 1.34 1.46 1.56 
50 kg 1560 6.54 179 0 7.47 2010 8.40 2230 9 .34 1.42 1.54 1.64 
55 kg 1650 6.9 1 189 0 7.9 0 2120 8.89 2360 9 .87 1.49 1.62 1.72 
60 kg 1740 7.29 19 9 0 8.33 2240 9 .37 249 0 10.41 1.55 1.69 1.80 
65 kg 1830 7.66 209 0 8.75 2350 9 .85 2620 10.9 4 1.62 1.76 1.87 
70 kg 19 20 8.03 219 0 9 .18 2470 10.33 2740 11.48 1.68 1.83 1.9 5 
75 kg 2010 8.41 2300 9 .61 2580 10.81 2870 12.01 1.74 1.89 2.01 
80 kg 2100 8.78 2400 10.04 2700 11.29 3000 12.55 1.79 1.9 5 2.08 
85 kg 219 0 9 .16 2500 10.47 2810 11.77 3130 13.08 1.85 2.01 2.14 
9 0 kg 2280 9 .53 2600 10.89 29 30 12.26 3250 13.62 1.9 0 2.07 2.21 
42 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
Body w eight (kg) 
Low  Active 
(PAL 1.40) 
kcal/ day M J/ day kcal/ day M J/ day kcal/ day M J/ day kcal/ day M J/ day 24.9 21.0 18.5 
M oderately Active 
(PAL 1.60) 
Active 
(PAL 1.80) 
Very Active 
(PAL 2.00) 
Height (m ) for 
BM I values of 1
1 H eight ranges are presented for each m ean w eight for ease of m aking dietary energy recom m endations to m aintain an adequate BM I based on a population’s m ean height and PAL. F or exam ple, 
the recom m ended m ean energy intake for a m ale population of this age group w ith a m ean height of 1.70m  and a lifestyle w ith a m ean PAL of 1.60, is around 9 .13 M J (2,180 kcal) per day, to 
m aintain an optim um  population m edian BM I of 21.0, w ith an individual range of about 8.78 – 9 .82 M J (2,100 – 2,350 kcal) per day, to m aintain the individual BM I lim its of 18.5 – 24.9 . 
Appendix 1.8 E nergy requirem ents of adults aged 30 – 59 years in populations w ith different body w eight and four levels of habitual physical activity 
M en (30 - 59 years) 
40 kg 1620 6.78 1850 7.74 2080 8.71 2310 9 .68 1.27 1.38 1.47 
45 kg 169 0 7.08 19 30 8.09 2180 9 .10 2420 10.11 1.34 1.46 1.56 
50 kg 1760 7.38 2020 8.44 2270 9 .49 2520 10.54 1.42 1.54 1.64 
55 kg 1840 7.68 2100 8.78 2360 9 .88 2620 10.9 8 1.49 1.62 1.72 
60 kg 19 10 7.9 9 2180 9 .13 2450 10.27 2730 11.41 1.55 1.69 1.80 
65 kg 19 80 8.29 2260 9 .47 2550 10.66 2830 11.84 1.62 1.76 1.87 
70 kg 2050 8.59 2350 9 .82 2640 11.04 29 30 12.27 1.68 1.83 1.9 5 
75 kg 2130 8.89 2430 10.16 2730 11.43 3040 12.70 1.74 1.89 2.01 
80 kg 2200 9 .20 2510 10.51 2830 11.82 3140 13.14 1.79 1.9 5 2.08 
85 kg 2270 9 .50 259 0 10.85 29 20 12.21 3240 13.57 1.85 2.01 2.14 
9 0 kg 2340 9 .80 2680 11.20 3010 12.60 3350 14.00 1.9 0 2.07 2.21 
W om en (30 - 59 years) 
40 kg 1440 6.02 1650 6.88 1850 7.75 2060 8.61 1.27 1.38 1.47 
45 kg 1530 6.40 1750 7.32 19 70 8.23 219 0 9 .15 1.34 1.46 1.56 
50 kg 1620 6.78 1850 7.75 2080 8.72 2310 9 .68 1.42 1.54 1.64 
55 kg 1710 7.16 19 50 8.18 2200 9 .20 2440 10.22 1.49 1.62 1.72 
60 kg 1800 7.53 2060 8.61 2310 9 .69 2570 10.76 1.55 1.69 1.80 
65 kg 189 0 7.9 1 2160 9 .04 2430 10.17 2700 11.30 1.62 1.76 1.87 
70 kg 19 80 8.29 2260 9 .47 2550 10.66 2830 11.84 1.68 1.83 1.9 5 
75 kg 2070 8.67 2370 9 .9 0 2660 11.14 29 60 12.38 1.74 1.89 2.01 
80 kg 2130 8.9 3 2440 10.21 2740 11.48 3050 12.76 1.79 1.9 5 2.08 
85 kg 2250 9 .42 2570 10.77 289 0 12.11 3220 13.46 1.85 2.01 2.14 
9 0 kg 2340 9 .80 2680 11.20 3010 12.60 3350 2340 1.9 0 2.07 2.21 
43 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
Body w eight (kg) 
Low  Active 
(PAL 1.40) 
kcal/ day M J/ day kcal/ day M J/ day kcal/ day M J/ day kcal/ day M J/ day 24.9 21.0 18.5 
M oderately Active 
(PAL 1.60) 
Active 
(PAL 1.80) 
Very Active 
(PAL 2.00) 
Height (m ) for 
BM I values of 1
1 H eight ranges are presented for each m ean w eight for ease of m aking dietary energy recom m endations to m aintain an adequate BM I based on a population’s m ean height and PAL. F or exam ple, 
the recom m ended m ean energy intake for a m ale population of this age group w ith a m ean height of 1.70m  and a lifestyle w ith a m ean PAL of 1.60, is around 8.64 M J (2,060 kcal) per day, to 
m aintain an optim um  population m edian BM I of 21.0, w ith an individual range of about 8.25 – 9 .42 M J (1,9 70 – 2,250 kcal) per day, to m aintain the individual BM I lim its of 18.5 – 24.9 . 
Appendix 1.9 E nergy requirem ents of elderly aged 60 years and above in populations w ith different body w eight and four levels of habitual physical activity 
M en ( ≥ 60 years) 
40 kg 1480 6.19 169 0 7.07 19 00 7.9 5 2110 8.84 1.27 1.38 1.47 
45 kg 1560 6.53 1780 7.46 2010 8.40 2230 9 .33 1.34 1.46 1.56 
50 kg 1640 6.87 1880 7.85 2110 8.84 2350 9 .82 1630 1.54 1.64 
55 kg 1720 7.22 19 70 8.25 2220 9 .28 2460 10.31 1.49 1.62 1.72 
60 kg 1810 7.56 2060 8.64 2320 9 .72 2580 10.80 1.55 1.69 1.80 
65 kg 189 0 7.9 0 2160 9 .03 2430 10.16 2700 11.29 1.62 1.76 1.87 
70 kg 19 70 8.24 2250 9 .42 2530 10.60 2820 11.78 1.68 1.83 1.9 5 
75 kg 2050 8.59 2350 9 .81 2640 11.04 29 30 12.27 1.74 1.89 2.01 
80 kg 2130 8.9 3 2440 10.21 2740 11.48 3050 12.76 1.79 1.9 5 2.08 
85 kg 2220 9 .27 2530 10.60 2850 11.9 2 3170 13.25 1.85 2.01 2.14 
9 0 kg 2300 9 .62 2630 10.9 9 29 60 12.36 3280 13.74 1.9 0 2.07 2.21 
W om en ( ≥ 60 years) 
40 kg 1430 5.9 9 1630 6.84 1840 7.70 2040 8.55 1.27 1.38 1.47 
45 kg 149 0 6.25 1710 7.14 19 20 8.04 2130 8.9 3 1.34 1.46 1.56 
50 kg 1560 6.52 1780 7.45 2000 8.38 2230 9 .31 1.42 1.54 1.64 
55 kg 1620 6.78 1850 7.75 2080 8.72 2320 9 .69 1.49 1.62 1.72 
60 kg 1680 7.05 19 30 8.06 2170 9 .06 2410 10.07 1.55 1.69 1.80 
65 kg 1750 7.32 2000 8.36 2250 9 .41 2500 10.45 1.62 1.76 1.87 
70 kg 1810 7.58 2070 8.66 2330 9 .75 259 0 10.83 1.68 1.83 1.9 5 
75 kg 1880 7.85 2140 8.9 7 2410 10.09 2680 11.21 1.74 1.89 2.01 
80 kg 19 40 8.11 2220 9 .27 249 0 10.43 2770 11.59 1.79 1.9 5 2.08 
85 kg 2000 8.38 229 0 9 .58 2570 10.77 2860 11.9 7 1.85 2.01 2.14 
9 0 kg 2070 8.65 2360 9 .88 2660 11.12 29 50 12.35 1.9 0 2.07 2.21 
44 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
M alaysia (2017 ) 
Age group kcal/day 
M alaysia (2005) FAO/W HO/UNU (2004) IOM  (2002/2005) 
Appendix 1.10 C om parison of recom m ended E nergy requirem ent: M alaysia (2017 ), M alaysia (2005), FAO/W HO/UNU (2004) and IOM  (2002/2005) 
Age group kcal/day Age group kcal/day Age group kcal/day 
Infants (boys) Infants (boys) Infants (boys) Infants (boys) 
0 - 2 m onths 470 0 - 5 m onths 560 0 - 5 m onths 580 0 - 5 m onths 550 
3 - 5 m onths 540 6 - 11 m onths 640 6 - 11 m onths 720 6 - 11 m onths 730 
6 - 8 m onths 630 
9  - 11 m onths 720 
Infants (girls) Infants (girls) Infants (girls) Infants (girls) 
0 - 2 m onths 420 0 - 5 m onths 550 0 - 5 m onths 540 0 - 5 m onths 500 
3 - 5 m onths 500 6 - 11 m onths 630 6 - 11 m onths 660 6 - 11 m onths 660 
6 - 8 m onths 570 
9  - 11 m onths 660 
C hildren (boys) C hildren (boys) C hildren (boys) C hildren (boys) 
1 - 3 years 9 80 1 - 3 years 9 80 1 - 3 years 1110 1 - 2 years 1060 
4 - 6 years 1300 4 - 6 years 1340 4 - 6 years 1470 3 - 8 years 1700 
7 - 9  years 1750 7 - 9  years 1780 7 - 9  years 1830 
C hildren (girls) C hildren (girls) C hildren (girls) C hildren (girls) 
1 - 3 years 9 00 1 - 3 years 9 10 1 - 3 years 1020 1 - 2 years 1000 
4 - 6 years 1210 4 - 6 years 129 0 4 - 6 years 1330 3 - 8 years 1600 
7 - 9  years 1610 7 - 9  years 159 0 7 - 9  years 1700 
Boys Boys Boys Boys 
10 - 12 years 19 30 10 - 12 years 2180 10 - 12 years 2350 9  - 13 years 2300 
13 - 15 years 2210 13 - 15 years 269 0 13 - 15 years 29 80 14 - 18 years 3100 
16 - 18 years 2340 16 - 18 years 2840 16 - 17 years 3370 
G irls G irls G irls G irls 
10 - 12 years 1710 10 - 12 years 19 9 0 10 - 12 years 2140 9  - 13 years 2080 
13 - 15 years 1810 13 - 15 years 2180 13 - 15 years 2440 14 - 18 years 2350 
16 - 18 years 189 0 16 - 18 years 2050 16 - 17 years 2500 
45 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Energy 
M alaysia (2017 ) 
Age group kcal/day 
M alaysia (2005) FAO/W HO/UNU (2004) IOM  (2002/2005) 
Age group kcal/day Age group kcal/day Age group kcal/day 
M en M en M en M en 1
19  - 29 years 2240 19  - 29 years 2440 18 - 29  years 2800 19  - 30 years 3050 
30 - 59  years 219 0 30 - 59  years 2460 30 - 59  years 2850 31 - 50 years 2880 
≥60 years 2030 ≥60 years 2010 ≥60 years 19 50 51 - 70 years 2630 
> 70 years 2110 
W om en W om en W om en W om en 1
19  - 29 years 1840 19  - 29 years 2000 18 - 29  years 2150 19  - 30 years 2450 
30 - 59  years 19 00 30 - 59  years 2180 30 - 59  years 2250 31 - 50 years 2330 
≥60 years 1770 ≥60 years 1780 ≥60 years 1800 51 - 70 years 2130 
> 70 years 1680 
Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy 
1st trim ester +   80 1st trim ester +     0 1st trim ester +     0 1st trim ester 
2nd trim ester + 280 2nd trim ester + 360 2nd trim ester + 360 2nd trim ester + 180 
3rd trim ester + 470 3rd trim ester + 470 3rd trim ester + 475 3rd trim ester + 180 
Lactation Lactation Lactation Lactation 
1st 6 m onths + 500 1st 6 m onths + 500 W ell-nourished + 505 1st 6 m onths + 500 
U ndernourished 2nd 6 m onths + 400 
(up to 6 m onths) + 675 
1 C alculated based on reference w eight and height of M alaysian m en and w om en (page 8); and m oderately active PAL for adults and low  active PAL for elderly. 
46 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
2 • Protein 
2.1 Introduction 
Protein is one of the major components of body tissues and an essential nutrient for 
grow th. Aside from water, proteins form a major part of lean body tissues, constituting about 
17% of the body weight. Amino acids are the building blocks for proteins, joined together by 
peptide bonds between the carboxyl and the amino group of the next amino acid in line (EFSA 
2015). Protein in the diet and the body are associated with a number of vitamins and minerals 
and are more com plex and variable than other energy sources such as fat and carbohydrate. 
Protein is available from a variety of foods and is ample in the Malaysian diet. 
The body’s fluids are contained within cells (intracellular) and outside the cells 
(extracellular). Extracellular fluids are found either in the spaces between cells (interstitial) or 
within blood vessels (intravascular). Wherever proteins are, they attract water and this helps to 
maintain the fluid balance in their various compartments.  
There are two kinds of amino acids; essential and non-essential amino acids. Essential 
amino acids are defined as those that the body is unable to synthesize from simple molecules. 
They include histidine, leucine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine, threonine, tryptophan and 
valine. Cysteine and tyrosine can partly replace methionine and phenylalanine, respectively. 
Under certain extreme physiological conditions, such as in prematurity or during some catabolic 
illnesses, the non-essential amin o acids arginine, cysteine, glutam ine, glycine, proline and 
tyrosine ma y be required in the diet. Under normal conditions, glutamine, glutamate or aspartate 
can supply arginine; methionine and serine can be converted to cysteine; glutamic acid and 
ammonia can be converted to glutamine; serine or choline can supply glycine; glutamate can 
provide proline; and phenyl-alanine can be converted to tyrosine. These amino acids are 
som etimes term ed conditionally essential. Alanine, aspartic acid, asparagine, glutamic acid and 
serine are non-essential amino acids. Amino acids act as precursors for ma ny coenzyme s, 
horm ones, nucleic acids and other molecules (Wu, 2016). 
After ingestion, proteins are denatured by acid in the stomach and cleaved to sma ller 
peptides. A numbe r of gut enzyme s including trypsin, chymotrypsin, elastase and carboxy- 
peptidase complete the process. The free amino acids and small peptides that result are 
absorbed into the mucosa by a specific carrier system. After intracellular hydrolysis of absorbed 
peptides, free amino acids are secreted to the portal blood where  some of the amino acids are 
taken up and the rem ainder pass into systemic circulation for delivery to and to be used by 
peripheral tissues. 
2.2 Functions 
The prim ary roles for proteins in the body include being structural proteins, enzymes , 
hormone s, transport proteins and immuno proteins. The m aintenance of body tissues is 
essential because the body is constantly undergoing wear and tear, and proteins and amino 
acids provide continuous repairs. Proteins are important for the formation of regulatory 
comp ounds. Some horm ones, all enzym es, and mo st other regulatory materials in the body are 
protein substances. Proteins defend the body against diseases. Wh en the body detects invading 
antigens, it manufactures antibodies, which are large protein molecules designed specifically 
to combat them . The antibodies work so swiftly and efficiently that in normal, healthy 
47 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
individuals, most diseases never have a chance to get started. In addition, proteins help maintain 
the balance between acids and bases within the body fluids by accepting and releasing hydrogen 
ions. Even though proteins are needed for grow th, maintenance and repair, they will be used to 
provide glucose when the need arises (Stephenson & Schiff, 2016).  
2.3 M etabolism 
Protein metabolism  compr ises the processes that regulate protein digestion, amino acid 
m etabolism and body protein turnover. These processes include the absorption and supply of 
both essential am ino acids and non-essential amino acids, de novo synthesis of essential amino 
acids, protein hydrolysis, protein synthesis, and am ino acid utilisation in catabolic pathw ays or 
as precursors for nitrogenous compounds  (EFS A, 2015). The main pathway of amino acid 
m etabolism is protein synthesis. 
D igestion and Absorption 
Digestion begins in the mouth with chewing, leading to food disruption and hydration/ 
solubilisation of the proteins. Once swallowed , the protein digestion process starts in the 
stomach through the action of the enzyme pepsin, w hich is in acidic medium, cleaves proteins 
into smaller peptides. The proteins then enter the small intestine and are further hydrolysed by 
pancreatic and intestinal enzymes. Lastly, non-digested proteins from dietary or endogenous 
origins reach the large intestine where they undergo important hydrolysis by microflora, which 
releases the am ino acids, peptides and metabolites.  Two m ajor mechanisms  are involved in the 
absorption of the luminal products of protein digestion: (1) transport of liberated free amino 
acids by group specific active amino acid transport systems , and (2) uptake of unhydrolysed 
peptides by mechanisms independent of the specific amino acid entry mechanisms (Silk, 
G rimble & Rees, 1985). 
Storage and excretion of protein 
Excessive amounts of amino acid in the body will be converted into ammonia, a highly 
toxic comp ound, through the deamination process, wh ich mainly occurs in the liver. This is 
because there is no specific storage of amino acids, the me tabolites of proteins, in the body, 
either in the muscle or other tissues. 
In the liver, am mo nia is converted into urea, a metabolic waste product, and released into 
the bloodstream. The kidneys pick up the waste products of amino acids, which include urea, 
a sm all amo unt of ammoni a and creatinine. These products are eliminated from the body 
through urine excretion. The remaining carbon skeleton of amino acids after the deamination 
process is used for energy or converted to other compounds , such as glucose. 
Nitrogen loss from the body is mainly through urine excretion. It can also be remove d 
by the body through removal of nails, hair or dead skin. Besides, amino acids can be excreted 
in the faeces, at approximately 25% to 30% of total amino acid losses, or by metabolic 
oxidation, which is about 70%  to 75% of total amino acid losses or through breastfeeding 
(EFSA , 2015). 
48 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
To some extent, the liver or kidneys ma y be able to use the excess amino acids to 
produce glucose through the process of gluconeogenesis. The glucose product o f 
gluconeogenesis will be synthesized into glycogen, a multi-branched polysaccharide of glucose 
that serves as a form of energy storage. Glycogen can be broken down into glucose through 
the process of glycogenolysis, and the resulting glucose molecules are then released into the 
bloodstream for other cells to use. However, some excessive amounts of amino acids, such as 
leucine and tryptophan, are in the ketogenic form, and cannot be converted directly into glucose. 
Ketoge nic amino acids have carbon skeletons that can be converted into acetyl-coA. If the 
acetyl-coA molecules derived from ketogenic amino acids do not enter the citric acid cycle, 
they will be used for the fatty acid synthesis (Stephenson & Schiff, 2016).  
Nutrient interactions with protein 
Most of the proteins like enzymes, which are produced in the liver, rema in in the liver. 
How ever, some of the proteins are released into the plasm a. The proteins found in plasma 
include primarily glycoproteins, simp le proteins and lipoproteins. Albumin is the most abundant 
of the plasma proteins. A healthy person normally produces approximately 9 to 12 g albumin 
daily. The main roles of plasma albumin are to maintain intravascular oncotic (colloid osmotic) 
pressure and facilitate transportation of substances. These substances include fatty acids, 
tryptoph an, zinc, calcium, and copper, vitamins such as vitamin B6, lipid-soluble hormone s 
and some drugs like warfarin, phenobutazone and clofibrate (Hankins, 2006).  
Meanw hile, globulins, a family of globular proteins, act as protein transporters and 
antibodies for nutrient transport and blood clotting. Some of the globulins are produced in the 
liver, while some are produced by the immune system . G lobulins exist in several classes, 
including α-1-globulins (such as glycoproteins and high-density lipoprotein), α-2-globulins 
(glycoproteins, haptoglobin, ceruloplasmin, prothrombin and very-low-density lipoproteins), 
β-globulins (transferrin and low-density lipoproteins), and γ-globulins (immu noglobulins or 
antibodies) (Gropper & Smith, 2013). Different classes of lipoproteins play important roles in 
transporting cholesterol and triglycerides in the blood stream, while haptoglobin is used for 
free hem oglobin transport, ceruloplasmin for copper transport and oxidase activity, and 
transferrin for iron and other mineral transport. 
In addition,  there are two other protein transporters synthesized by the liver and released 
into plasma namely, transthyretin (TTR, also called prealbum in) and retinol-binding protein 
(RBP ). Transthyretin (TTR) is a transport protein in the serum  and cerebrospinal fluid that 
carries the thyroid hormone thyroxine (T4). The RBP enables retinol to enter and leave the liver 
for several times per day in a process of retinol recycling. The RBP is useful for retinol circulation 
and protects cells from the damaging effects of free retinol or retinoic acid. 
Some  vitamins and minerals, such as vitamin B6, folate, and phosphorus are involved 
in amino acid metabolism. For instance, vitamin B6 (as part of pyridoxal phosphate, PLP), is 
involved in the conversion of the amino acid tryptophan to niacin and the transam ination 
reactions that form nonessential amino acids, such as aspartate, glutamate and alanine. Glycine 
is formed from serine in the presence of two cofactors from vitamin B6 (as PLP) and folate (as 
part of tetrahydrofolate, THF) (Gropper & Smith, 2013). 
49 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
The body is able to utilise amino acids to form nitrogen-containing compounds  known 
as amino acid derivatives e.g. carnitine. Carnitine is imp ortant in transporting fatty acids, 
espe cially long-chain fatty acids, across the inner m itochondrial m em brane for oxidation 
process. 
2.4 Food Sources 
Proteins in human diet are derived from two main sources, namely animal proteins (e.g. 
fish, poultry, meat, egg and milk) and plant proteins (e.g. pulses, cereals, nuts, beans and soy 
products). List of protein food sources by weight is show n in Table 2.1. Animal proteins are 
m ore “biologically com plete” than vegetable proteins with regards to their amino acid 
com position. The term “complete proteins” refers to foods that contain all the essential amino 
acids needed by the body, whereas, incomplete proteins refers to foods lacking in one or more 
essential amino acids. Ho we ver, an incomplete protein can be converted into a com plete protein 
if two  incomplete proteins are added together by employing what is called “complemen tarity of 
proteins”.  Two plant proteins, such as legumes and grains, or legumes and nuts/seeds, can be 
m ixed to produce a complete protein from two incomplete ones. 
Animal proteins 
M eat, poultry and seafood are the main types of com plete proteins with an almo st similar 
am ount of protein content among them. Milk is not only a valuable source of protein, but also 
a rich source of calcium and vitamins. A glass (250 ml) of fresh whole milk contains about 8.5 
g of protein. In addition, non-fat dry milk or fortified skim milk contains equivalent amount of 
proteins and other nutrients to whole milk. Dairy products, such as chee se and ice cream, can 
provide generous amounts of protein in the diet. Breast milk is not only a comp lete protein, but 
also a com plete food for infants up to 6 months of age. Egg is a com plete protein with excellent 
quality; one egg will give 6 g of protein. The egg yolk contains protein, fat and cholesterol, while 
egg white contains mostly protein with no fat or cholesterol. 
Plant proteins 
M ost proteins from plant sources are incomplete proteins and contain smaller amounts 
of proteins than animal sources. However, legum es are an exception: peas, lentils, beans, 
chickpeas, lima beans, soybeans and peanuts have large amounts of proteins in their seeds. 
Although proteins from legumes are not equal in quality with animal proteins, they can be an 
adequate substitute if they are eaten in combination with other foods. 
50 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
Table 2.1: Protein contents of foods              
Foods Protein (g/100g) 
a. Legumes and seeds 
Chickpea, cooked 20.4 
Y ellow dhal, cooked 19.2 
Soyabean cake, fermented 15.9 
Soyabean curd, Tau-kua 10.9 
Soyabean curd, Tau-hoo 7.2 
Soyabean milk, unsweetened 3.7 
b. Meat and poultry 
Liver, Gizzard (chicken) 25.0 
Beef (lean) and beef burger patty 22.6 
Liver (ox) 21.0 
G oat (lean) 20.8 
M utton (lean) 20.1 
Chicken frankfurter 18.5 
Chicken, breast 18.3 
Beef frankfurter 18.2 
Chicken burger patty 18.0 
Pork (lean) 16.5 
Lung (ox) 15.7 
Chicken, thigh 13.3 
Duck egg 12.9 
Duck, breast 11.4 
H en egg 11.1 
Q uail egg 10.3 
Chicken, wing 7.6 
c. Fish and seafood 
Anchovy, dried, whole 50.0 
Travelly, yellow-banded 15.3 
M ackerel, Spanish 15.2 
Cuttlefish, fresh 14.5 
Fish balls 12.7 
Fish crackers, fried 12.4 
Scad, hairtail 12.1 
Prawn, pink 11.4 
M ackerel, Indian 11.3 
Sardine 10.6 
Bream, African 9.6 
Cockles, boiled 8.5 
51 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
Foods Protein (g/100g) 
d. Milk and milk products 
M ilk, powder (Instant, full cream and skim 25.7 
Cheese, processed, cheddar 21.7 
M ilk, sweetened condensed 8.4 
M ilk, evaporated 7.7 
M ilk, UHT, low fat, recombined (g/100 ml) 4.1 
Cow’ s milk, fresh (g/100 ml) 3.2 
Y ogurt, apricot flavor 3.1 
Source:  Tee et al., (1997). 
2.5 D eficiencies and Excesses 
Protein deficiency 
Protein deficiency is usually accompanied by a deficiency of calories and other nutrients. 
The effects of protein loss during illness, injury and intense physical training can result in 
negative nitrogen balance, which can increase protein metabolism, and lead to muscle wasting, 
anem ia and retarded recovery. A lowering of serum protein level and hormonal changes may 
result in oedem a, and reduced production of antibodies leading to increased susceptible to 
infections. 
Protein-deficient diets are in general nutrient-poor diets, deficient to varying degrees in 
a range of other nutrients, and also often associated with other environmental factors that can 
adversely influence health (WHO/ FAO/U NU, 2007). 
M alnutrition remains one of the most devastating problems faced by the majority of the 
poor and needy countries (WHO, 2000). The Wor ld Health Organization (WHO, 1993) defines 
ma lnutrition as "the cellular imbalance between the supply of nutrients and energy and the 
body's demand for them to ensure growth, maintenance, and specific functions." The term 
protein-energy malnutrition (PEM) applies to a group of related disorders that include 
m arasmus, kwashiorkor and intermediate states of marasmus -kwashiorkor. Marasmus involves 
inadequate intake of protein, calories and other nutrients for a prolonged period whilst 
kwashiorkor refers to inadequate protein and ene rgy intake with oedema. This condition is 
com mon among vulnerable young children. 
The elderly is a vulnerable group undergoing physiological changes, and m ay be 
experiencing dental problems and difficulty in swallowing, which can lead to eating problems 
and malnutrition (Hickson, 2006). Protein intake ratio to total energy for the elderly is higher 
com pared to adults, placing the elderly at risk of protein deficiency.  
People who are most at risk of inadequate protein intake include those on strict vegan 
diets, with multiple food allergies, and those with limited e access to food. 
52 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
Protein Excesses 
The WH O/ FAO / UNU (2007) Expert Con sultation men tioned several potential adverse 
effects of overconsumption of proteins and amino acids. It is prudent for adults to avoid protein 
intakes in excess of more than twice the recomm ended amount. Such excessive intakes by 
physically active individuals consuming protein enriched diets and protein and am ino acid 
supplem ents. Individuals who intend to lose substantial body weight may rely on a low 
carbohydrate and high protein diet, which can lead to excessive intake of protein.  Although 
high protein diets have beneficial effects on satiety and weight control, there are some caveats, 
such as increased acid load to the kidneys or high fat content of animal proteins (Pesta & 
Samuel, 2014). 
Diets containing high protein have been well documente d to result in an increase in 
urinary calcium excretion, amounting to a 50% increase in urinary calcium for a doubling of 
protein intake (Lemann, 1999). This has tw o potential detrimental conseque nces; loss of bone 
calcium and increased risk of renal calcium stone formation. Although a high protein intake 
might increase the risk of kidney stones and bone resorption, as yet no clear conclusions can 
be drawn  since dietary effects are apparent only in studies with very large differences in protein 
intakes (i.e. >185 g/day compared with 80 g/day) (WHO/FAO /UNU, 2007). Howe ver, acute 
adverse effects have been reported for protein intakes that exceed 45% of the total energy (IO M 
2002/2005). 
Current know ledge of the relationship between  high protein intake and health is 
insufficient to enable clear recommendations about either optimal intakes for long-term health 
or to define a safe upper limit (WHO/FAO /UNU, 2007). 
2.6 Factors affecting protein requirements 
The availability of proteins from dietary sources is influenced by several factors 
summar ised in the following paragraphs. 
a) Protein contents of foods 
The protein amounts reported in food composition tables are assessed by determining. 
Total nitrogen in the food, usually by the Kjeldhal method, whereby the result is multiplied 
by a specific factor to calculate the protein content of the food. As most proteins contain 
about 16% nitrogen, the total dietary nitrogen multiplied by 6.25 gives an estimate of 
“crude protein” content. The nitrogen content in protein differs in different categories of 
foods and the conversion factor to use is provided in FAO/W HO (1973). 
b) Protein quality 
Protein quality refers to how well or poorly a given protein can be absorbed from a diet 
and utilised by the body. Sp ecifically, it refers to how well the essential amino acid profile 
of a protein satisfies their functions in the body, as well as the digestibility of the protein 
and bioavailability of the amino acids. The comm on methods of evaluating protein quality 
53 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
include biological value, protein efficiency ratio, chem ical score of protein, protein 
digestibility, protein digestibility corrected am ino acid score (PDCA SS) and digestible 
indispensable amino acid score (DIAAS). 
i. Biological Value 
Biological value (BV) of protein is a measure on how efficiently food protein, once 
absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, can be turned into body tissues. 
Biological value can be calculated by dividing the amount of nitrogen retained for 
the body’s use by the nitrogen absorbed from food (WHO, 2007). This product is 
m ultiplied by 100, expressed as a percentage of nitrogen utilized. 
If a food possesses enough of all nine essential amino acids, it should allow a 
person to efficiently incorporate the food protein into body proteins. The biological 
value of a food depends on how closely its amino acid pattern reflects the amino 
acid pattern in the body tissues. For example, egg-white protein has a biological 
value of 100, the highest biological value of any single food protein. In other 
words, essentially all nitrogen that is absorbed from egg protein can be retained. 
Milk and meat proteins also have high biological values (Hoffman & Falvo, 2004).  
If the amino acid pattern in a food is not similar with tissue amino acid patterns, 
m any amino acids in the food will not becom e body protein but they simply 
becom e “leftovers” and excreted in the urine as urea. For instance, plant amino 
acid patterns differ greatly from those of hum ans. Corn has only a moderate 
biological value of 70, which is high enough to support body maintenance, but not 
for growth. Peanuts consum ed as the only source of protein show  a low biological 
value of 40. 
ii. Protein Efficiency Ratio 
Protein efficiency ratio (PER ) is another means of me asuring a food’s protein 
quality. The PER of a food reflects its biological value, since both basically 
m easure protein retention by body tissues. Plant proteins, because of their 
incomplete nature, generally yield lower PER values, whereas the values for animal 
proteins are higher, often above 2.0. 
iii. Chemi cal Score of Protein 
Chemi cal score estimates the protein quality of a food. The amount of each 
essential amino acid provided by a gram of the food protein is divided by an “ideal” 
am ount for that amino acid per gram of food protein. The “ideal” protein pattern 
is based on the minimal amount (in milligrams) of each of the essential amino 
acids that is needed per gram of food protein. The lowest am ino acid ratio 
calculated for any essential amino acid is the chemic al score. Scores vary from 0 
to 1.0. 
54 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
iv. Protein Digestibility 
The degree to which a protein is digested influences its nutritional value. Animal 
proteins are digested more efficiently than plant proteins (Hoffman & Falvo, 2004). 
This is because digestive enzym es have greater difficulty entering plant cells, 
w hich are surrounded by cellulose and woody substances. The method of cooking 
also affects digestibility. Heat alters the structure but not the amino acid content 
of protein molecules. Over-heating, however, may destroy some amino acids or 
m ay cause the formation of products resistant to digestive enzym es. Cooking with 
w ater improves the digestibility of wheat and rice proteins. 
The digestibility of protein is normally expressed in relation to that of egg, milk, 
me at or fish, which are used as reference proteins (digestibility = 100) (WH O, 
2007). Differences in digestibility result from intrinsic differences in the nature of 
food protein and the nature of the cell wall, from  the presence of other dietary 
factors that modify digestion (e.g. dietary fiber, polyphenols such as tannins and 
enzym e inhibitors) and from  chemical reactions (e.g. binding of the amino groups 
of lysine and cross linkages), which may affect the release of amino acids by 
enzymatic processes (FAO, 2013). There are few data on digestibility of specific 
am ino acids in food proteins. 
v. Protein Digestibility Corrected Amino Acid Score (PDCAA S) 
The m ost widely used measure of protein quality is the Protein Digestibility 
C orrected Am ino Acid Score (PDC AAS ). This is used in place of Protein Efficiency 
Ratio (PER) evaluations for foods intended for children over 1 year of age and for 
non-pregnant adults. To calculate the PD C AAS of a protein, its chemical score is 
determined. For example wheat has a chemical score of 0.47. The score is then 
m ultiplied by the digestibility of the protein (generally, 0.9 to 1.0), in turn yielding 
the PDC AAS . The maximum PDC AA S value is 1.0, which is the value of milk, 
eggs, and soy protein. A protein totally lacking any of the nine essential amino 
acids has a PDC AAS of 0, since its chemical score is 0 (FAO, 2013). 
vi. D igestible Indispensable Amino Acid Score (DIAAS) 
The use of a single value of crude protein digestibility to correct the amount of 
each individual dietary indispensable amino acid for its digestibility is considered 
to be a shortcoming as there are quantitative differences in digestibility between 
crude protein and individual dietary indispensable and dispensable am ino acids. 
In addition, the PDC AA S approach is based on an estimate of crude protein 
digestibility, w hich is determ ined over the total digestive tract (i.e. faecal 
digestibility) in the correction for digestibility. This may lead to overestimation of 
the amount of amino acids absorbed. Due to these limitations, FAO h as 
recomm ended a revised protein quality measure, the Digestible Indispensable 
Amino Acid Score (DIAAS) to replace PDCA AS (FAO, 2013). 
55 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
DIAAS determines amino acid digestibility at the end of the small intestine, which 
provides a more precise estimate of the amounts  of amino acids absorbed by the 
body and the contribution of protein to hum an amino acid and nitrogen 
requirements. DIAAS can be calculated as: 
DI AAS % =  100 x [(mg of digestible dietary indispensable amino acid in 1 g of the 
dietary protein) / (mg of the same dietary indispensable amino acid in 1g of the 
reference protein)]. 
DIAAS can be used to estimate available protein intake when evaluating the protein 
quality in mixed dishes or in sole source foods (e.g., infant formulas) and to adjust 
dietary protein intakes to meet requireme nts. DIAAS can be used to define protein 
equivalent intake (protein adequacy), when it is multiplied by the actual protein 
content or intake (i.e. measured protein intake times DIAAS ) (F AO, 2013). 
The DIAAS is also used to determine the quality of a single ingredient or individual 
food for the consideration of complem enting other protein foods (FAO, 2013). A 
DIAA S more than 100 demonstrates potential to comp lemen t protein of lower 
quality in order to maintain a suitable total N intake.  
c) Biological factors 
Age 
Protein requirement depends on age due its dem and for grow th and ageing 
Protein requirements are the highes t after birth because musc les and tissues grow at a 
rapid pace. Protein needs during adolescence are influenced by the amount of protein 
required for maintenance of existing lean body mass and to accrue additional body mass 
during the growth spurt. Therefore, requirem ents based on developme ntal age are more 
accurate in estimating protein requirement as compared to chronological age. Insufficient 
protein intake will result in delayed or stunted increases in height and weight as well as 
w eight loss and lean body m ass loss that can subsequently alters body com position 
(Stephenson & Schiff, 2016).   
The protein needs of older adults are higher than that of adults due to the ageing 
process. Protein synthesis and whole body proteolysis in response to an anabolic 
stimulu s is low as compared to younge r adults. The greater protein requirement is 
thought to be related to the enhanced protein synthesis necessary to assist in the repair 
and remode ling process of damaged skeletal mu scle fibers (Hoffm an et al., 2006). 
Therefore, incorporating a small increase in protein intake is also helpful to ensure 
nitrogen balance in older adults. 
56 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
Sex 
F or infants and children, the protein requirements for both males and fem ales are 
similar due to similarity of growth and developm ent rates. In adolescence, pubertal 
developm ent incurs differences in protein requirements between adolescent boys and 
girls. A greater muscle mass in males places a higher requiremen t for protein, com pared 
to females.  
Physiological state 
Physiological state such as infections, worm infestations, injury, emotional 
disturbances and stress may affect an individual’s protein requirement. A negative 
nitrogen balance after injury tends to be higher in muscular well-nourished individuals 
than in malnourished individuals (Kurpad, 2006). Injuries or infections lead to an 
increased nitrogen loss from the body that subsequently increases the risk of 
malnutrition. Severe critical conditions such as sepsis and trauma can result in significant 
protein loss. Individuals suffering from protein loss should increase their protein intake, 
particularly during the recovery phase.  However, the body may react slowly to increased 
protein intake due to increased insulin resistance, thus limiting the usefulness of an 
enhanced protein intake (Simsek, Simsek & Cantürk, 2014). 
Pregnancy 
Additional protein is required during pregnancy to provide support for the 
synthesis of ma ternal and fetal tissues. Maternal protein requiremen t increases from 
early gestation period and reaches its maximum level during the third trime ster. 
As for adolescent pregnancy, as the adolescent herself is undergoing rapid growth 
and development, she will have a higher protein needs compared to a pregnant adult. 
Pre-pregnancy weight and weight gain during pregnancy are correlated with birth weight 
of the infant. The WHO/FAO/U NU  (2007) Expert Consultation reported that, an average 
pre-pregnancy weight of a pregnant adolescent is about 55 kg, and estimated that an 
average weight gain throughout adolescent pregnancy is 12.5 kg. Therefore, the 
requirement for protein intake is 1.5 g/kg pregnant weight/day. 
Lactation 
Me an production rates of milk produced by well-nourished wo men  exclusively 
breastfeeding their infants during the first 6 mo nths postpartum  and partially 
breastfeeding in the second 6 months postpartum were used together with the mean 
concentrations of protein and non-protein nitrogen in hum an milk to calculate mean 
equivalent milk protein output (WHO/F AO /UNU, 2007).  
57 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
d) Other considerations 
Vegetarians 
Vegetarianism  is increasingly popular in Malaysia. This dietary practice, wh ich 
focuses on plant-based food sources may affect the quality and quantity of protein 
consum ed by vegetarians. For instance,  inge stion of soy protein was found to result in 
low er postprandial muscle protein synthesis rates both at rest and during recovery from 
exercise , compa red to ingestion of beef, whey, or milk, (Tang et al. 2009; van Vliet, Burd 
& van Loon, 2015; Wilkinson et al. 2007). Diets that are solely based on cereals, root 
crops, vegetables, and legume s m ay not provide adequate amounts of indispensable 
am ino acids, especially for children undergoing developm ent stage. IOM  (2005) 
concluded that available evidence does not support recom mending a separate protein 
requirem ent for vegetarians, who consume a compleme ntary mixtures of plant proteins.  
Athletes 
The rationale for a higher protein requirement for athletes is to repair and replace 
damaged proteins, remodel protein within muscle, bone, tendon, and ligamen ts; maintain 
optim al functions of all metabolic pathw ays that use amino acids; support increm ents of 
lean mass; support an optimal functioning immune  system ; support the optimal rate of 
production of plasma proteins and suppo rt other acid amino requiring processes 
functioning at rates higher than non-athletes (IO M , 2002/2005). Based on Institute of 
M edicine (IOM,  2002/2005), the proportion of protein as a percentage of total energy that 
is considered sufficient for endurance athlete is 10-20% and 20-40% for strength 
athletes. In order to optimize the ratio of fat-to-lean tissue mass loss during hypo- 
energetic periods, athletes are advised to ensure that they increase their protein intake 
to 20–30%  of their energy intake or 1.8–2.7 g/kg/day (Phillips & van Loon 2011). 
Athletes are advised to consume  protein food imm ediately after resistance exercise, 
particularly high-quality milk protein, to maximize exercise-induced increases in musc le 
m ass. 
IO M (2005) concluded that no additional dietary protein is sugges ted for healthy 
adults undertaking resistance or endurance exercise. 
Twin Pregnancy 
In the W H O/FA O /UNU (2007) Expert Co nsultation report, wo men  with twin 
pregnancy have higher protein needs than women having singleton births. Re sults from 
nutritional intervention by Mo ntreal Diet Dispensary shows that an additional 50 g of 
protein daily can improve twin pregnancy outcomes, whe reby low birth weight rate are 
decreased by 25% and very low birth weight by 50%, and preterm delivery reduced by 
30%. An additional 50 g daily is needed from  the 20th week of pregnancy, which is 
double the pregnancy allowance for wome n with singleton pregnancies. 
58 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
2.7 Setting requireme nts and recommended intake of protein 
The RN I 2005 (NCC FN, 2005) had recomm ended 10-15% for protein contribution to 
total energy intake (TEI) based on WHO (2003). This TEI was also aligned w ith the finding of 
the Malaysian Adults Nutrition Survey (MANS, 2003), which reported the median protein intake 
of Malaysian adults of 55.3g/day, which amounted to 14.3% of the TEI. 
For the 2017 RNI , the upper limit of protein contribution to TEI has been set highe r at 
20% TEI, as compared to the 15% TEI in the 2005 RNI. Protein intake of Malaysian is higher 
than in 2003, as reported in MA NS  (2014), which recorded protein intake of 56.7g/day 
contributing to 16% of TEI. The increased upper limit of protein intake is in line with the 
recom mendations of other countries namely, the Nutrient Reference Values for Australia and 
New  Zealand (2005) 15-25%TEI, IOM (2006) 10-35%TEI, and Japan DRI (2015) 13-20%TEI. 
According to the mem bers of the C onsultation of WH O/FAO /UNU (2007), the 
FAO /WHO /UNU  (1985) had over-estimated the protein requireme nt for infants, children and 
adolescent. Hence, the protein recommendation for these age groups in the 2017 RNI is lower 
compa red to the 2005 RNI. According to WHO/ FA O/UNU  (2007), calculation of protein 
requirem ents, except for pregnant and lactating women, should be ma de in two steps: first, 
the requireme nt per kg should be obtained according to the age range; and second, this should 
be mu ltiplied either by the actual weight or by the median we ight for age to obtain the total 
requirem ent. 
The WHO/F AO/UNU (2007) has been used as a reference in setting requirem ents for 
protein intake for infants, children and adolescents (Table 2.2). A safe level was calculated as 
average plus 2SD, assuming a coefficient of variation derived from the coefficients of variation 
for growth and maintenance, which fell from 16% at 6 mo nths to 12% at 2 years of age. If 
actual weights are not available, the median weight at the actual age from the W H O we ight-for- 
age growth charts is recommended (WH O 1994). 
The main references used by the Technical Sub-Comm ittee (TSC) on Energy and 
M acronutrients in making recomm endations for protein intake for the revised RNI  are based on 
the report of DRI commi ttee of Institute of Medicine IOM (2002/2005), the Report of a joint 
WH O /FAO /UNU (2007) Expert Consultation and the Scientific report of European Food Safety 
Authority (EFSA, 2012). 
59 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
Table 2.2 Safe level of protein intake for infants, children and adolescent boys and girls 
Age 
(years) 
Boys Girls 
Weight 
(kg) 
Safe level 
of protein 
intake 
(g/kg/day) 
Safe level 
of protein 
intake 
(g/day) 
Wei ght 
(kg) 
Safe level 
of protein 
intake 
(g/kg/day) 
Safe level 
of protein 
intake 
(g/day) 
0.5 7.8 1.31 10.2 7.2 1.31 9.4 
1 10.2 1.14 11.6 9.5 1.14 10.8 
1.5 11.5 1.03 11.8 10.8 1.03 11.1 
2 12.3 0.97 11.9 11.8 0.97 11.4 
3 14.6 0.90 13.1 14.1 0.90 12.7 
4-6 19.7 0.87 17.1 18.6 0.87 16.2 
7-10 28.1 0.92 25.9 28.5 0.92 26.2 
11-14 45.0 0.90 40.5 46.1 0.89 41.0 
15-18 66.5 0.87 57.9 56.4 0.84 47.4 
Source: WHO/FAO/UNU (2007) 
G eneral considerations 
The met hods used as basis for estimating protein requirements are the factorial method 
and the nitrogen (N) balance method which takes into consideration protein required for 
m aintenance and growth (maintenance of 0.66 g/ kg body weight/day and a protein efficiency 
utilisation of 58%). However, for young infants, estimations of protein requirement s are based 
on hum an milk intake (WHO/F AO /UNU, 2007). 
The nitrogen-balance technique involves the determination of the difference between the 
intake of nitrogen and the amount excreted in urine, faeces, and sw eat, together with minor 
losses by other routes. In a healthy adult wh o is in energy balance, the protein requireme nt 
(maintenance requiremen t) is defined as that amount of dietary protein sufficient to achieve 
zero nitrogen balance. The requirement for dietary protein is considered to be the amount 
needed to replace obligatory nitrogen loses, after adjustm ent for the efficiency of dietary protein 
utilisation and the quality of the dietary protein. 
In positive nitrogen balance, more nitrogen is taken in than is lost. Positive nitrogen 
balance is seen w hen new tissue is being built, as in infancy and childhood, in adolescence, in 
pregnancy and lactation and during recovery from an illness or injury in which protein has been 
lost. Negative nitrogen balance is seen when a person had an infection or traumatic injury. More 
nitrogen is excreted than ingested. Negative nitrogen balance also happens in under-nutrition 
w hen protein intake is too low or is of poor quality. In this case, body protein is broken down 
to supply energy and for recovery.  
60 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
The factorial method is used to calculate protein requirements for physiological condition 
such as growth, pregnancy or lactation, in which nitrogen is not only needed for maintenance 
but also for the deposition of protein in newly formed tissue or secretions (milk). 
In the RNI 2005, protein quality of 80% was assumed in the recom m endations for protein 
requirem ents for ages above 6 months. This level of protein quality is ma intained by the TSC 
on Energy and Macronutrients for 2017 RNI  based on two considerations. First, the total daily 
protein intake and TEI values for MANS (2003) and MANs (2014) were approximately similar 
as explained in Item 2.7 above.  Besides that, the proportion of protein from animal products 
available to Malaysians in 2003 and 2013 were also quite similar, 55.1% and 55.7% respectively 
(FAO STAT, various years). This data is based on Malaysia Food  Balance Sheets since MAN S 
surveys did not differentiate the sources of protein consume d between animal and plant food 
products.  
The TSC for Energy and Macronutrients decided to adopt WHO /FAO/ UN U  (2007) in 
estimating protein requirements for all age groups. 
Recom mended intakes by age groups 
The recom m ended protein intake for the revised RNI for the various groups is given in 
the following sections in bold and summarised in Appendix 2.1. 
Infants, 0 – 5 months 
Estimations of protein requirements for infants aged 0 - 5 months are based on huma n 
milk intake (WHO/F AO/U NU , 2007). The assumption is made that for the first 6 months of life, 
human m ilk from a healthy we ll-nourished mother can be regarded as providing an optim al 
intake of protein for the infant. The average protein requirement for the 3-4 month old infant 
(1.47 g protein/kg body weight/day) derived from the factorial method is very similar to the 
average human milk protein intake values (1.49 g protein/kg body we ight/ day) for this age 
group, with protein intakes of breastfed infants of healthy m others assumed  to provide 
adequately for the infants’ protein needs. Protein intake per kg body weight is 55-80% higher 
in formu la than in breast fed infants and it has been found that high early protein intakes in 
excess of metabolic requirements enh ance weight gain in infancy and increase later obesity 
risk (Alexy et al., 1999). Thus, breast milk should be used as the gold standard in recommending 
protein intake for infants 0-5 months (Koletzko et al., 2009). 
The TS C on Energy and Macronutrients recom men ded to  ado pt the 
WH O /FAO /UNU (2007) recommended intake of 1.31 g protein/kg body w eight/day (Appendix 
2.1) and to use the reference body weight for the Malaysian population of 5.6 kg for infants 0- 
5 months. 
61 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
RNI for infants 
0 – 5 months 8 g/day   
Infants, 6-11 Months 
The period from 6 to under 12 months is clearly the m ost critical, because of rapid 
grow th during this time and because the child increasingly relies on com plem entary foods. The 
average protein requirements for infants greater than 6 months of aged was estimated based 
on the average level plus 1.96 SD. 
For infants aged from 6 to under 12 months, the maintenance requirem ent was estimated 
at 0.56g/ kg body weight/day from nitrogen balance studies.The WH O/FAO /UNU  (2007) 
recomme nded protein intake of 1.14g/ kg body weight/day (10g/day) of high quality protein for 
infants aged 6 to under 12 months. 
The TSC on Energy and Macronutrients recom m ended adopting the WHO/ FAO/UNU 
(2007) recomm ended intake of 1.14g protein/kg body weight/day (Appendix 2.1) and to use the 
reference body weight for the Malaysian population of 8.6 kg for infants 6-11 months.  
RNI for infants 
6 - 11 months 10 g/day 
C hildren and adolescents 
In the WH O/FAO /UNU (2007) Expert Consultation report, maintenance requireme nt for 
children and adolescent was estimated at 0.63 g/ kg body weight/day and total requirement, 
allowing for decreasing requirement for growth with age, was estimated to range from 0.63-0.67 
g/kg body weight/day. An additional 30% allowance was made  to take into account for inter- 
individual variability in protein utilisation and digestibility. The established the recomme nded 
intake for child and adolescent groups in four categories, which are children aged 1 to under 4 
years (1.0g/ kg body weight/ day) and 4 to under 15 years, and for boys aged 15 to under 19 
years (0.9g/ kg body weight/ day) and girls aged 15 to under 19 years (0.8g/ kg body weight/ 
day). 
The safe level of protein intake for children of various ages was referred to the Table 5.2. 
The TSC  on Energy and Macronutrients recommended adopting the recommenda tions of this 
report, which the values are 1.01, 0.87 and 0.92 g/kg body we ight/day for children ages 1-3 
years, 4-6 years and 7-9 years (Appendix 2.1), respectively. The corresponding reference 
w eights appropriate for Malaysian children used are 12 kg, 18 kg and 25 kg, respectively.   
62 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
For adolescent boys, the recom m ended protein intake in g/kg body weight/day, are 0.90, 
0.90 and 0.87 for ages 10-12 years, 13-15 years and 16-18 years, respectively (Appendix 2.1). 
The corresponding recommended protein intake for adolescent girls is 0.89, 0.89 and 0.84 g/kg 
body weight/day, respectively. The reference weights for adolescent M alaysian boys for the 
three age groups are 33 kg, 50 kg and 59 kg, respectively. The corresponding w eights for girls 
are 35 kg, 47 kg and 50 kg, respectively. 
Based on these data, the RNI for protein have been calculated and sum marised below. 
RN I for children 
1 - 3 years 12 g/day 
4 - 6 years 16 g/day 
7 - 9 years 23 g/day 
RN I for adolescents 
Boys 10 - 12 years 30 g/day 
13 - 15 years 45 g/day 
16 - 18 years 51 g/day 
Girls 10 - 12 years 31 g/day 
13 - 15 years 42 g/day 
16 - 18 years 42 g/day 
Adults 
For adults, the accepted value for the safe level of protein intake is 0.83 g/kg body 
weight/day with a protein digestibility-corrected am ino acid score value of 1.0 (W HO/FAO/UNU 
2007). There is no safe upper limit has been identified. Any intakes of twice from the safe level 
are associated with any risk. H owever, caution is advised to those contemplating the very high 
intakes of 3–4 times the safe intake, since such intakes approach the tolerable upper limit and 
cannot be assumed to be risk-free. 
There is also a broad agreement that the requirement for protein at 0.8 g 
protein/kg body weight/day, although sufficient to prevent deficiency, is insufficient to promote 
optimal health, particularly in populations exposed to catabolic stressors such as illness, 
physical inactivity, injury, or advanced age. Several recent consensus statemen ts have 
suggested that a protein intake between 1.0 and 1.5 g protein/kg body weight/day may confer 
health benefits beyond those afforded by simply meeting the current requireme nt. 
63 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
The revised RNI for protein for adults, are based on the recommendati ons from both 
W H O /FAO /UNU (2007) and EFSA (2012), which is at 1.00 g protein/kg body weight/day after 
taking into consideration with the studies mentioned above. The reference weights for Malaysian 
m ale adults for the two age groups are 61.4 kg and 60.6 kg, respectively. The reference weights 
for Malaysian female adults are 52.9 kg and 52.2 kg, respectively. 
RNI for adults 
M en 19 - 29 years 62 g/day 
30 - 59 years 61 g/day 
Wom en 19 - 29 years 53 g/day 
30 - 59 years 52 g/day 
Elderly 
Although WH O/FA O /UNU  (2007) and EFS A (2012) have estimated that protein 
requirement s do not change with age during adult life, recent evidence have shown that the 
current recomme nded intake for protein, while fulfilling the criteria as the ‘minimal daily average 
dietary intake level that meets the nutritional requirem ents of nearly all healthy individuals’, 
does not prom ote optimal health or protect the elderly from sarcopenic muscle loss. By doubling 
the recomme nded intake of protein from  0.8 g/kg body weight/day to 1.5 to 1.6 g/kg body 
w eight/day, it may result in better muscle and bone health in elderly individuals. The doubled 
recom men ded intake is considered within the acceptable range of intake (10–35% of total 
calories). In addition, the recommended intake of 1.0 to 1.2 g protein/kg body weight/day for 
elderly may represent a compromi se while longer term protein supplemen t trials are still 
pending. 
The revised RNI for protein for elderly are based on the recom m endations from 
W H O /FAO /UNU (2007) and EFSA (2012), which is at 1.00 g protein/kg body weight/day after 
taking into consideration with the studies mentioned above.  The reference weights for elderly 
M alaysian for male and female at the age of > 60 years are 58.1 kg and 49.5 kg, respectively. 
RNI for elderly 
M en >60 years 58 g/day 
Wom en >60 years 50 g/day 
64 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
Pregnancy 
In the 2005 RN I, a single value for extra protein was recom men ded throughout 
pregnancy (+7.5g/day). However, in the proposed RNI (2017), the recom m endation is based on 
WHO /FAO /UNU (2007). It is suggested additional protein intake during pregnancy is needed 
for newly deposited protein and the maintenance costs associated with increased body weight. 
Me an protein deposition has been estim ated from total body potassium (TBK) accretion in we ll- 
nourished wom en with a mean gestational weight gain of 13.8 kg. Recomm ended additional 
protein intake during pregnancy is shown in Table 2.3. 
More  recent body-comp osition me asureme nts do not show  any maternal storage in early 
pregnancy, thus increasing amo unts are recommended for each trimester. The efficiency of 
protein utilisation was taken to be 42%. The maintenance costs were based upon  the m id- 
trimester increase in maternal body weight and the adult maintenance value of 0.66 g/kg per day. 
It is recom mended  that a higher intake of protein during pregnancy should consist of normal 
food, rather than commerci ally prepared high protein supplements. The safe level was derived 
from the average requireme nt, assuming a coefficient of variation of 12%. Based on an efficiency 
of protein utilisation of 42%, the recommended additional protein intake for pregnant women 
as shown below: 
Table 2.3: Recom mended additional protein intake during pregnancy 
Trimester 
Mid- 
trim ester 
weight gain 
(kg) 
Additional 
protein 
maintenance 
(g/day) 
Protein 
deposition 
(g/day) 
Protein 
deposition, 
adjusted 
efficiency 
(g/day) 
Additional 
protein 
requirem ent 
(g/day) 
Additional 
safe intake 
(g/day) 
1 0.8 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.7 
2 3.2 3.2 1.9 4.5 7.7 9.6 
3 7.3 7.3 7.4 17.7 24.9 31.2 
Source: WHO/F AO/UNU  Expert Consultation report (2007) 
The TSC for Energy and Macronutrients decided to recommend an additional 8 and 25 
g/day protein in the second and third trimesters based on the WHO/FA O/UNU (2007) Expert 
Consultation recommendation (Appendix 2.1). 
RN I for Pregnancy 
1st Trimester +0.5 g/day 
2nd Trimester +8 g/day 
3rd Trimester +25 g/day 
65 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
Lactation 
Based on W H O /FAO /UNU  (2007) Expert C onsultation, protein requiremen ts during 
lactation was derived using a factorial approach which requires assessing milk volum es 
produced and the content of both protein nitrogen and non-protein nitrogen , as well as 
calculating the amount of dietary protein needed for milk protein production. As the efficiency 
of protein utilisation for milk protein production is unknown, the efficiency associated with the 
production of milk protein was taken to be the same as for protein depo sition in the non- 
lactating adult (47%) was assumed. Thus, the additional dietary protein requirement during 
lactation will be an amount of digestible protein equal to milk protein, divided by an efficiency 
of 0.47. The safe protein intake was calculated as me an +1.96SD with 1SD calculated on the 
basis of a coefficient of variation of 12%. The additional safe protein intakes during the first 6 
mo nths of lactation ranged from 19 to 20 g protein/day reduced to 13 g protein/day after 6 
m onths. 
The TSC  for Energy and Macronutrients proposed to recom me nd an additional 19 g for 
the first 6 months of lactation and an additional 13 g protein per day for second 6 months of 
lactation based on WHO/FAO/UNU  (2007) Expert Consultation. 
RNI for lactation 
1st 6 months +19 g/day 
2nd 6 months +13 g/day 
2.8 D iscussion on Revised RNI for Malaysia 
C omp aring the RNI (2005) and RNI (2017) recomme nded intakes of protein for the latter 
are lower in the case of infants, children and adolescents, while the recommende d intakes are 
higher for adults and the elderly. In the revised RN I (2017), the additional amounts 
recomm ended for pregnancy at 2nd and 3rd trimesters are higher, wh ile the additional amounts 
of lactation at 1st and 2nd 6 months are lower, as comp ared to the RNI (2005) These changes 
in the recomm ended values are mainly based on the adoption of the WHO/FA O/UNU (2007) 
and changes in the reference body weight for Malaysians (Appendix 2.1). 
66 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
2.9 Research Recomm endations 
There is a need to impr ove our understanding of the relationship between  protein intakes 
and overall health. This is a particularly important area for future research. 
The following priority areas of research are recomm ended: 
• C onducting periodic national nutrition surveys to obtain updates on the intake of protein 
and amino acids, especially among vulnerable groups. 
• G enerate data on protein and amino acid compositions of Malaysian foods. 
• Assessment of body protein homeostasis and balance. 
• Evaluation of the impact of high protein diets in weight reduction regiments. 
• Evaluation of vegetarian diets and determination of ways to maximise protein and am ino 
acid contents in these diets. 
• Reevaluation of protein deficiency in relation to energy and micronutrient deficiencies 
am ong malnourished children and elderly. 
67 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
2.10 References :
Alexy U, Kersting M, Sichert-Hellert W, M anz F, & Scoch G. Ma cronutrient intake of 3 to 36 
mont h old German infants and children: results of the DONA LD Study. Dortmund 
Nutritional and Anthropometric Longitudinal Designed Study. Ann Nutr M etab 43, 
14-22. 
EFS A (2015). Scientific opinion on dietary reference values for protein. EFS A Panel on Dietetic 
Products, Nutrition and Allergies (NDA), European Food Safety Authority. EFSA  Journal. 
10(2):2557 
F AO/WHO (1973). Energy and Protein Requiremen ts. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO  Ad Hoc Expert 
C ommi ttee. WHO  Technical Report Series No. 522. World Health Or ganization, Geneva.  
F AO/WHO/ UNU  (1985). Energy and protein requirem ents. Expert Co nsultation World Health 
`Organization Technical Report Series 724. World Health Organization, Geneva. 
FA O  (2003;2013), Food Balance Sheet from www .fao.org/faostat/en/#data/FBS/report. 
F AO (2013). Dietary protein quality evaluation in huma n nutrition: Rep ort of an FAO Expert 
C onsultation. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome. 
G ropper SS & Smith JL. (2013). Advanced nutrition and hum an m etabolism. Wadsworth 
C engage Learning, USA. 
H ankins J. (2006). The role of albumin in fluid and electrolyte balance. J Infusion Nursing. 29, 
260-265. 
H ickson M (2006). Malnutrition and ageing. Postgrad Med J , 82(962):2—8. 
H offman JR & Falvo MJ (2004). Protein – Which is Best? J Sports Science Med, 3, 118–130. 
Ho ffm an JR, Ratam ess NA, Kang J, Falvo MJ & Faigenbaum AD (2006). Effect of protein intake 
on strength, body compo sition and endocrine changes in strength/power athletes. J. Int. 
Soc. Sports. Nutr. 3, 12-18. 
IO M (2002/2005). D ietary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrates, Fiber, Fat, Protein and 
Am ino Acids (Macronutrients). Foo d and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine. National 
Academy Press, Washington D.C. Chapter 5. 
Koletzko B, von Kries R, Closa R, Escribano J, Scaglioni S, Giovannini M, Beyer J, Demmelmair 
H , Gruszfeld D, Dobrzanska A, Sengier A, Langhendries JP , Rolland Cachera MF, & Grote 
V; European Childhood Obesity Trial Study Group. (2009). Lower protein in infant formula 
is associated w ith lower weight up to age 2 y: a randomized clinical trial. Am  J Clin Nutr 
89,1836-1845. 
68 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
Kurpad AV (2006). The requirements of protein & amino acid during acute & chronic infections. 
Indian J Med Res, 124, 129-148. 
Leman n J Jr (199 9). Relationship between urinary calcium and net acid excretion as 
determined by dietary protein and potassium: a review. Nep hron, 81 (Suppl. 1):18–25 
Malaysian Adult Nu trition Survey (MA NS ) (2003). Dietary Intake of Adults Aged 18  to 59 Years. 
Ministry of Health Malaysia. 
Malaysian Adult Nutrition Survey (MANS) (2014). N utrient Intake of Adults Aged 18 to 59 Years. 
Ministry of Health Malaysia. 
National Coordinating C ommi ttee on Food and Nut rition (N CCFN) 20 05. Malaysian 
Recommended Nutrient Intakes. Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia (NHMRC) 2005. N utrient Reference 
Values (NRVs) for Australia and New Zealand. Com m onw ealth Dep artmen t of Health and 
Ageing and the Ministry of Health, Australia 
Pesta DH  & Sam uel VT (2014). A High-Protein Diet for Reducing Body Fat: Mechanisms and 
Possible Caveats. Nutrition & Metabolism, 11:53. 
Ph illips SM  & Van Loon LJ. (2011). Dietary protein for athletes: From requiremen ts to optimum 
adaptation. J Sports Sci 29, Suppl 1:S29–S38. 
Silk DB A, Grimble G K & Rees RG (1985). Protein digestion and amino acid and peptide 
absorption. Proceedings of the Nutrition Society, 44, 63-72. 
Sim sek T, Sim sek HU  & Cantürk NZ (2014). Response to traum a and met abolic changes: 
posttraumatic metabolism. Ulusal Cer De rg, 30, 153-159. 
Stephenson TJ & Schiff WJ. (2016). Human nutrition: science for healthy living. McGraw Hill 
Education, New York. 
Tang JE, Moore DR, Kujbida GW, Tarnopolsky MA, & Phillips SM. (2009). Ingestion of whey 
hydrolysate, casein, or soy protein isolate: effects on mixed mus cle protein synthesis at 
rest and following resistance exercise in young men. J Appl Physiol 107, 987–992. 
Tee ES, Moh d Ismail N, Mohd Nasir A and Khatijah I (1997). Nu trient Compo sition of Malaysian 
Foo ds. 4th Edition. Ma laysian Foo d Comp osition Database Programm e, Institute for 
Medical Research, Kuala Lumpur; 310 p. 
The Scientific Comm ittee (2015). Dietary Reference Intakes for Japanese; Recommended 
Dietary Allowance. Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, Japan 
Vliet S, Bu rd NA, & van Loon LJ. (2015). The skeletal muscle anabolic response to plant- versus 
animal-based protein consumption. J Nutr 145, 1981-1991. 
69 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
W ilkinson SB, Tarnopolsky MA, MacDonald MJ, MacDonald JR, Arms trong D, & Phillips SM. 
(2007). Consump tion of fluid skim milk promo tes greater muscle protein accretion after 
resistance exercise than does consum ption of an isonitrogenous and isoenergetic soy- 
protein beverage. Am J Clin Nutr 85, 1031–1040. 
World Health O rganization (WH O) (199 3). The worldwide m agnitude of protein-energy 
m alnutrition: an overview from the WHO  Global Database on Child Growth . Bulletin of the 
World Health Organization. 1993. 71(6): 
World Health Organization (WH O). (1994 ). An evaluation of infant grow th. A summary of 
analyses performed  in preparation for the WHO Ex pert Committee on Physical Status: the 
use and interpretation of anthropometry in infants. World Health Organization, Geneva. 
W orld Health Organization (W HO)  (2000). A global agenda for comb ating malnutrition: progress 
report. Geneva, World Health Organization, (docume nt WH O/NHD/00.6). 
World Health Organization (WHO ). (2003). Diet, Nutrition, and the Prevention of Chronic 
D iseases: Report of a WHO Study Group. World Health Organization, Geneva 
Wo rld Health Organization (WHO) . (2007). Protein and amino acid requirements in human 
nutrition. Report of a joint F AO /WH O/U NU expert  consultation. Worl d Health 
O rganization, Geneva. 
W u G. (2016). Dietary protein intake and human health. Food Funct. 7, 1251-1265. 
70 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
M alaysia (2017 ) 
Age group RNI (g/day) 
M alaysia (2005) W HO/FAO/UNU (2007 ) IOM  (2002/2005) 
Appendix 2.1 C om parison of recom m ended intake for protein: RNI M alaysia (2017 ), RNI M alaysia (2005), W HO/FAO/UNU (2007 ) and IOM  (2002/2005)  
Age group RNI (g/day) Age group Safe intake 
(g/kg/day) Age group AI 
(g/kg/day) 
Infants Infants Infants Infants 
0 - 5 m onths 8 0 - 5 m onths 11 0 - 5 m onths 1.31 0 - 6 m onths 1.52 
6 - 11 m onths 10 6 - 11 m onths 12 6 - 11 m onths 1.14 7 - 12 m onths 
C hildren C hildren C hildren C hildren 
1 - 3 years 12 1 - 3 years 17 1 - 3 years 1.01 1 - 3 years 1.1 
4 - 6 years 16 4 - 6 years 23 4 - 6 years 0.87 4 - 8 years 0.9 5 
7 - 9  years 23 7 - 9  years 32 7 - 9  years 0.9 2 
Boys Boys Boys Boys 
10 - 12 years 30 10 - 12 years 45 10 - 12 years 0.9 0 9  - 13 years 0.9 5 
13 - 15 years 45 13 - 15 years 63 13 - 15 years 0.9 0 14 - 18 years 0.85 
16 - 19  years 51 16 - 19  years 65 16 - 19  years 0.87 
G irls G irls G irls G irls 
10 - 12 years 31 10 - 12 years 46 10 - 12 years 0.89 9  - 13 years 0.85 
13 - 15 years 42 13 - 15 years 55 13 - 15 years 0.89 14 - 18 years 0.85 
16 - 19  years 42 16 - 19  years 54 16 - 19  years 0.84 
M en M en M en M en 
19  - 29  years 62 19  - 59  years 62 19  - 64 years 1.00 19  - 70 years 0.80 
30 - 59  years 61 ≥70 years 0.80 
71 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Protein 
M alaysia (2017 ) 
Age group RNI (g/day) 
M alaysia (2005) W HO/FAO/UNU (2007 ) IOM  (2002/2005) 
Age group RNI (g/day) Age group Safe intake 
(g/kg/day) Age group AI 
(g/kg/day) 
W om en W om en W om en W om en 
19  - 29  years 53 19  - 59  years 55 19  - 64 years 1.00 19  - 70 years 0.80 
30 - 59  years 52 ≥70 years 0.80 
E lderly E lderly E lderly 
M en ≥60 years 58 M en ≥60 years 59 M en ≥60 years 1.00 
W om en ≥60 years 50 W om en ≥60 years 49 W om en ≥60 years 1.00 
Pregnancy Pregnancy +7 .5 Pregnancy Pregnancy 1.1 
1st trim ester +0.5 1st trim ester +1 g/day 
2nd trim ester +8   2nd trim ester +9  g/day 
3rd trim ester +25 3rd trim ester +31 g/day 
Lactation Lactation Lactation Lactation 1.1 
1st 6 m onths +19   1st 6 m onths +20 1st 6 m onths +19  g/day 
2nd 6 m onths +13  2nd 6 m onths +15 2nd 6 m onths +13 g/day 
72 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
3 • Fats 
3.1 Introduction 
Betwee n 2000 and 2012, 73% of total deaths (n=146,000 cases) in Malaysia were attributed 
to non-communicable diseases (NC Ds) with a proportional mortality of 36% alone contributed by 
cardiovascular disease (CVD) (WHO , 2014). The National Health and Morb idity Survey (NHMS) 
2011 (n=  28,650) and The Malaysian Cohort (n=106,527) have reported 35.1-44.9% of Malaysian 
adults were hypercholesterolemic (IPH, 2011; Rahman et al. 2014). Further, metabolic syndrom e 
(MS ), which is a precluding factor in the development of NCDs, has an overall prevalence rate of 
27.5% in Malaysia and hypertriglyceridemia, a MS diagnostic criteria, is reported to be 29.3% 
(Rampal et al. 2012). 
According to the NHMS 2015, obese Malaysians make up 17.7%  of the population w hile 
those categorised as overweight make up 30% (IPH, 2015). Despite the overw helming tendency 
to associate obesity with higher fat intake, conclusive association between obesity and fat intake 
in the Malaysian population is not evident. In fact, the mean fat intake of the Malaysian population 
is reported to be <30% total energy intake (TEI) (Mirnalini et al., 2008). 
Incidence data for CVD keeps increasing in Malaysia along w ith burden of treatment. In the 
first decade of the 21st century, the most influential United States dietary guidelines (USDA 2010) 
focused on reducing total fat intake to <30%TEI, specifically saturated fats (SF A) to <10% TEI and 
dietary cholesterol to <300mg, in order to reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD). In 
contrast, the FAO (2010) and IOM (O tten et al. 2006) considered a relatively higher fat intake of 
35%TEI as acceptable for a normal active person. With newer findings in recent years, the US 
dietary guidelines (USDA, 2015) revised the upper limit for total fat intake to 35% TEI, limiting SFA 
intake between 5 to 10%TEI and eliminated the limitation for dietary cholesterol. 
The Malaysian Dietary G uidelines 2010 for a healthy population were developed to restrict 
dietary fat <30%TEI with a lower limit of 20%TEI and limiting the use of SFA  to less than 10%TEI 
as well as dietary cholesterol to 300mg; and this view supports current public health strategies 
to combat the rising NCD s in Malaysia (NCC FN , 2010). The Ministry of Health (MO H), Malaysia, 
launched a medium  term strategic plan in 2010, namely the National Strategic Plan for Non- 
Communic able Disease (NSP-NCD ) with the aim to strengthen the CVD and diabetes prevention 
and control programmes in Malaysia (NSP-NCD MOH 2010). 
This Technical Sub-Commi ttee (TSC) presents a rationale for the revision of recommended 
fat intake for Malaysians based on current available evidence. 
3.2 Functions 
Fat is essential in the human diet because of its energy density as well as its essentiality for 
physiological function, growth and developm ent. In addition, dietary fat aids the digestion, 
absorption and transport of fat-soluble vitamins and fat-soluble phytochem icals, such as 
carotenoids and lycopenes. During digestion, dietary fat depresses gastric secretions, slows 
gastric emp tying and stimulates biliary and pancreatic secretions, thereby aiding the digestive 
process. Excess fat is stored as adipose tissue, which enables human  survival during limited food 
availability. Fat also functions structurally to support organs in position and insulate nerves, 
protect the body from m echanical pressure and insulate the body to preserve body heat and 
temper ature. 
73 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
Chemi cally, dietary fats are triacylglycerol molecules with biological function and utilization 
related to the type of fatty acids esterified to a glycerol backbone. Structures of these fatty acids 
are built on carbon chains of varying length with either shared bonding (unsaturation) or single- 
bonding (saturation). The diversity of fats therefore depends on fatty acids that are either saturated 
or unsaturated and this nature together with carbon chain length determ ines health risk. Saturated 
fatty acids (SFA ) are hypercholesterolaemic (Hegsted et al. 1965; Katan et al. 1994), while longer 
chain fatty acids such as n-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids (n-6 PU F A), mainly linoleic acid (LA) are 
hypocholesterolaemic (Karupaiah et al. 2005). The intake of SF A for our population is expected 
to be high from  palm oil consum ption. It is estimated that human  consumption of LA is insufficient 
(Jakobsen et al. 2009) and therefore the public health approach is to encourage increased 
consumpt ion (USDA 2015; NCCFN 2010). The n-3 PUFA family have a hypotriglyceridemic effect 
w hich is useful to offset dyslipidemia which is common in a MS-prone population. 
3.3 Metabolism 
Sp ecific essential fatty acids (EFA s) me tabolically act as precursors for longer chain fatty 
acids (LCFAs) through chain elongation, which in turn are required for both form ation of cell 
me mb ranes as well as become precursors for the synthesis of eicosanoids (G ropper & Smith 
2012). Eicosanoids exert ‘hormone-like effects moderating a variety of metabolic -physiological 
actions including blood pressure lowering, diuresis, inhibit blood clotting, reduce inflammation, 
moder ate imm une function, vasoconstriction and other vital functions. 
Hum an digestion does not differentiate betwee n animal or vegetable sources of dietary fat 
but instead the chain length of fatty acids in the food matrix determines the route of absorption 
(Karupaiah & Sundram 2007). All dietary fats, predominantly triglycerides, undergo enzymatic 
hydrolysis in the stomach initiated by the gastric lipases, which release fatty acid esters. Fatty 
acids of short (C4-C6) and medium- (C8-C10) chain fatty acids (SC F As and MCF As) solubilize in 
intestinal fluids and are absorbed directly into the portal system. Once in portal circulation the 
SCF As and MCF As will form  complexes with albumin and are carried to the liver for oxidation. The 
major activity of digestion largely occurs in the duodenum for fatty acids of chain lengths greater 
than 12 carbon atom s and is carried out by the pancreatic lipases. Released long-chain fatty acids 
(LC FA s) undergo a protein-mediated absorption pathway. Ultimately post-assimilation, new 
triacylyglycerol (TAG) structures are re-assembled via the phosphatidic acid pathway for the 
LC FA s before incorporation into chylomicrons. Following fat absorption, chylomicrons are 
released into intestinal lymphatics, enter circulation via the thoracic duct and move to capillary 
surfaces of target organs (liver, heart, etc) or tissue (adipose, skeletal) where TAG disassembly 
takes place. The norm  after a meal is that chylomicron breakdown will be directed towards adipose 
tissue through the activation of adipose tissue lipoprotein lipase, which is triggered by the 
elevation of plasma insulin levels concurrent to a meal. In the fasting state, the horm onal balance 
favours skeletal tissues by the activation of muscle lipoprotein lipase. LCFAs from the diet undergo 
met abolic conversion with desaturases and elongases for conversion into the n-9, n-6 and n-3 
fam ilies of fatty acids. The n-6 and n-3 fatty acids in the membr ane phospholipids exert metabolic 
control through their role as precursors of eicosanoids. 
74 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
Aside from dietary sources of fat, endogen ous synthesis of triglycerides (TG) can also occur 
with excess intake of carbohydrate, as observed in individuals with hypertriglyceridemia. Those 
fatty acids that are not used for synthesis of eicosanoids or incorporated into tissues are oxidized 
for energy (Gropper & Smith 2012). Fatty acids yield energy by beta-oxidation in the mitochondria 
of all cells, except those in the brain and kidney. 
3.4 Food sources 
Dietary fats can be divided into two categories: visible and invisible fats. Visible fats come 
from  cooking oils that are plant-based (vegetable oils) and table spreads, w hich may be either 
plant-based (m argarines) or animal fats (butter). Invisible fats are natural constituents of edible 
biological material ranging from cereals, vegetables, fruits, pulses, nuts and oilseeds, dairy 
products, meat, eggs or seafood (Gunstone et al. 2007). 
Palm oil represents the main cooking oil for most Malaysians, as this country is a primary 
producer of palm oil. Cur rent consump tion is 6.6kg per capita/year or 17.8g/capita/day (FAO 
2011). Palm oil or palm olein has an almost  equal amount of saturated and unsaturated fatty 
acids as indicated by 40% of palmitic acid (C16:0), 4% of stearic acid (C18:0) and 43% of oleic 
acid (C18:1). Coconut oil is one of the major sources of SFA in the Malaysian diet as santan is 
com monly used in preparing meals. For instance, nasi lemak, curry and cendol are traditionally 
consum ed foods that use santan . Santan contains 92% of SF A with the major fatty acids being 
lauric acid and myristic acid. The fatty acid comp osition of various dietary fats and oils is provided 
in Appen dix 3.1. Significant fat content distribution of various food categories in terms of total fat 
and fatty acid classes are provided in Appendices 3.2a and 3.2b. Vegetable oils such as soybean 
and corn oils are the mains sources of the EFAs linoleic acid (LA) and α-linolenic acid (ALA), 
which are classified as n-6 PU FA s, whereas the long chain fatty acids (LCFAs) such as 
eicosapentaenoic (EPA) and docosahexaenoic (DHA) acids, classified as n-3 PUFAs, are mainly 
found in fish. The types of fish rich in LCFAs commonl y consume d by Malaysians are Indian 
mackerel (kembong), anchovies, yellow-tail and yellow-stripe scards, tuna, sardines, torpedo 
scads, Indian and short-fin scads, pomfret, red snapper, king m ackerel, marine catfish and 
stingray (Ahm ad et al. 2016). Appendix 3.3 provides the overall varying distribution of total fat in 
local fish, examples of cold water fish as well as the n-6 and n-3 fatty acid distribution in Malaysian 
foods. 
3.5 D eficiencies and Excesses 
Fat deficiency is rare and usually occurs in individuals with malabsorption related to inhibition 
of bile salts necessary for fat digestion such as liver disease, and adjunct deficiency of the fat- 
soluble vitamins (A, D, E and K) wo uld also be adversely affected (Jeppesen et al., 2000). Fat 
deficiency may also occur in malnutrition related to chronic disease conditions where blood levels 
of EFAs, mainly LA and ALA, may be below normal as in chronic kidney disease patients 
(Jeejeebhoy et al., 1990). Clinical symptom s of fat deficiency (LA and ALA) include growth 
retardation, skin lesions, reproductive failure, and fatty liver. Fat-free diets are noted to lead to 
clinical EFA deficiency symp tom s such as marked weigh t loss, dryness of the skin and atopic 
eczema and eventually death (Guarnieri & Johnson, 1970; Holman, 1971). 
75 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
Although ALA is considered an essential n-3 fatty acid because it cannot be synthesized by 
humans, its conversion to LCFAs is less efficient. Less than 4% of ALA is metabolised to DHA  in 
young healthy men (Burdge et al. 2002) but conversion is more than two-folds higher in woman 
(Burdge & Wootton 2002; Burdge 2004; Giltay et al. 2004). 
Arachidonic acid (AA) is approximately three times as effective as LA in promoting growth 
(Holman  19 71), but is not an essential nutrient since LA can be converted to AA in the body (Barr 
et al. 1981). In recent years, there is an inclination to categorise AA and DHA as EFAs, mainly in 
relation to their role in neurological and cognitive developme nt in young children and infants. 
Although, AA and DHA  can be synthesised in the body, daily requireme nt in certain groups of 
people m ay exceed body capacity to produce them. AA and DH A are high ly metabolised to 
numer ous important functional metabolites (Flock et al. 2013; Serhan & Chiang 2013) as well as 
crucial com ponents of the cell membranes particularly in the brain, nervous system  and imp ortant 
organs such as heart and lung (Harris et al. 2004; San Giovanni & Che w 2005; Innis 2008; Calder 2013). 
In the past decades, fat deficiency has never been an issue in the M alaysian population. 
Instead, with the abundance of cooking oil available for local consumption, the concern is tipping 
toward excess intake. Affordability and increased access to high -fat foods predisposes the 
population to increased consum ption of energy-dense foods w hich coupled together with the 
sedentary living would create a risk for obesity. According to the National Health and Morbidity 
Survey of 2015, obese Malaysians make up 17.7% of the population wh ile those w ho are 
categorised as overweight make up 30%. If added both together, almost half the population of 
M alaysia are either overwe ight or obese (IPH, 2015). Despite the overwhelming tendency to 
associate obesity with the percentage of fat intake, many long term epidemiological studies fail 
to provide causal relationships between the two. Fat alone cannot explain obesity as higher 
carbohydrate intakes also contribute to the high calorie matrix of diets (Astrup et al., 2000; 
Nordman et al., 2006). 
3.6 Factors affecting requirements 
Fat provides 9.0kcal/g compared with the m uch lower 4.0 kcal/g for carbohydrate and 
protein. As such, people consuming high-fat diets (>35% energy) coupled with a sedentary 
lifestyle, would likely become overweight or obese as their energy intake exceeds energy 
expenditure (Astrup et al., 2000). 
Cur rent median total fat intake as reported in the Malaysian Adult Nutrition Survey (MANS) 
2014 is estimated as 46g/day or 29%TEI. This intake varies between urban (median = 49g/day) 
and rural (median = 44g/day) populations as well as between  ethnic groups, with Ch inese 
(m edian= 53g/day) having the highest fat intake compared to Malays (me dian = 45g/day) and 
Indians (median = 47g/day) (IPH 2014). Previously, the MANS  2003 reported that fat intake was 
also different geographically, with the lowest intakes reported for Northern Peninsular of Malaysia 
(med ian=44g/day), followe d by Central and Southern Peninsular of Ma laysia (both median = 
45g/day), East Coast Peninsular of Malaysia (median 46g/day), while the highest fat intakes were 
reported in Sabah (median = 47g/day) and Sarawak (median = 49g/day) (Mirnalini et al., 2008). 
In terms of fat contribution to daily total energy intakes (TEI), reports for smaller populations 
ranges between 30 - 33 %TEI with 32.8%TEI reported for an urban Malay population (Eng & 
Moy , 2011), while 30%TEI of fat intake was reported in Peninsular Malaysia (Chee et al., 1997). 
76 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
The MANS 2014 also reports a decreasing trend in total fat consumption across age groups. 
Yo ung adults (below 40 years, median = 47g/day) consumed  more fat than those aged more than 
50 years (me dian = 44g/day) (IPH 2014). This is not surprising as apart from  physiological aging 
and cultural preferences, food intake is also influenced by socio-economic status and temporal 
society transitions (Popkin 2006; Manderson & Naemiratch, 2010). 
Physiological condition(s) such as pregnancy or lactation do not affect daily total fat 
percentage of energy requirements but infants and children up to 3 years are recognised to have 
higher percentage of energy requirements for total fat. Conditions of CVD, liver disease and 
diabetes will also affect fat requirements in order to fit therapeutic medical nutrition therapy goals 
(Simopoulos 1999). This shall be discussed later with regard to the requirements for the n-6 LA. 
As implied earlier, reducing excess fat consumption would also reduce total calorie intake, which 
would be beneficial for individuals with excess body weight (Astrup et al., 2000; Bray et al., 2002). 
3.7 Setting requirements and recommended intakes for fats 
3.7a Current opinion on Saturated fatty acids (SFA), monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFA), 
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) and trans fatty acids (TFA) 
SFA 
Based on the findings from three meta-analyses, a higher SFA  intake is not found to be 
significantly associated with increased CV D risk (Mente et al. 2009; Siri-Tarino et al., 2010; 
Ch owdh ury et al. 2014). Only Ment e et al. (2009), who included 146 sub-coho rts, found a 
marginally significant association between SF A intake and CVD risk when including both genders 
in the analysis. However, when the analysis separated effect of gender, no association was 
found in either men or women. Chowdhury et al., (2014) in pooling 32 observational studies 
(n=544,727 subjects) to compare the extreme tertiles of SFA consum ption, also found no 
association between SFA intake and CVD risk. 
MU FA 
The me ta-analysis by Cho wdhu ry et al. (2014) also show ed that MUF A intake did not 
affect CVD  outcomes . In contrast, a meta-analysis by Men te et al., (2009) reported a significant 
inverse association between MUFA intake and CVD risk in men but not in w omen. A systematic 
review and meta-analysis of 32 cohort studies (n=841,211 subjects) (Schwingshackl & 
Hoffmann, 2014) comparing the highest to the lowest tertiles of MUFA consumption from olive 
oil, with oleic acid as well as MUFA:SFA ratio determined, concluded that increased MUFA  intake 
resulted in a significant risk reduction for CVD mortality, CVD events and stroke. Subgroup 
analyses showed that only olive oil had a significant inverse correlation with CVD e vents and 
stroke whereas oleic acid or increased MUFA:SFA ratio had no observed effect on CVD events 
and stroke. 
77 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
PUFA 
The meta-analysis of 18 prospective cohorts by Mente et al. (2009) showed either higher n- 
3 PUF A intakes or total PUF A intake for 6 cohorts reduced risk of CVD in w omen but not in men 
or when both genders were combined in the analyses. However, Chowdhury  et al. (2012) in their 
met a-analyses of 14 prospective cohorts found no association betwee n higher intakes of long- 
chain n-3 PUFA  with CVD  risk. But with the inclusion of 32 observational studies, Chowdhury et 
al. (2014) reported a significant inverse association between long-chain n-3 PUF A (n=1 6 cohorts) 
and CVD risk whereas total n-6 intake (n=8 cohorts) was not associated with CVD risk. 
A higher ALA ( α-linolenic acid, C18:3n-3) intake was not significantly associated with CVD 
risk in both genders (Chowdhury et al. 2014; Mente et al. 2009). Howev er, with the inclusion of 
27 prospective and retrospective cohorts, Pan et al. (2012) found that higher ALA intake reduced 
CV D risk and coronary heart disease (CHD ) mortality whe reas there was no significant effect on 
total CHD and stroke events. 
Trans-fatty acids (TFA) 
A meta-analysis of 4 large-scaled cohorts, which followed 139,836 subjects (Mozaffarian & 
Clarke 2009), found that an additional 2%TEI derived from TFA resulted in a 23% increase in C VD 
risk. The met a-analysis by Chowdhury et al., (2014), which included 5 observational studies in 
their pooled analysis of the effect of TFA on CVD risk, showed that total TFA intake was positively 
correlated with increased risk of CHD, and resulted in a 16% increased CVD risk. 
Replacing SFA with other fatty acids and carbohydrates 
A meta-analysis of 11 cohorts, involving 344,696 subjects with 4 to 10 years of follow-up, 
found that replacing dietary SFA with PU FA reduced the risk of CVD by 13% and coronary deaths 
by 26%. Howe ver, replacing SFA  with carbohydrate resulted in a 7% increase in CVD events 
w ithout any effect on CVD mortality (Jakobsen et al., 2009). 
A review by Volek and Feinmann (2005) compiled 15 intervention studies which substituted 
dietary carbohydrate with fat, and reported that when high-fat low-carbohydrate diets wer e 
introduced, body weight, insulin and TG levels had a greater reduction while HDL-C levels were 
higher compared to low-fat high-carbohydrate diets. Another intervention study comparing low- 
fat high-carbohydrate diet (28%TEI from fat and 58%TEI from carbohydrate) with high-fat low- 
carbohydrate diet (40%TEI from fat and 46%TEI from carbohydrate) after a 6-wee k intervention, 
had reported a significant reduction in diastolic blood pressure and TG:H DL -C ratio without 
affecting insulin and LDL-C levels.  
78 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
n-6:n-3 fatty acid balance 
The n-6 FA in the diet consists of ma inly LA and its me tabolite AA , wh ile the n-3 FA 
compr ises ALA, EPA and DHA. Currently, the n-6:n-3 FA ratio of a chemically analysed typical 
Malaysian diet is about 24.2±9.6 (~8.45±0.64/0.45±0.56g) (Karupaiah et al., 2016) compared 
to a calculated ratio of 10 (3.5/0.35) (Ng 1995). FAO/WHO (1994)  recomm ends an n-6:n-3 FA 
ratio of 5-10. Both the absolute amounts of n-6 and n-3 FA, as well as their ratio are important 
nutritional considerations. Increasing the intake of n-3 poses a serious challenge, and any 
excess intake of LA (>7%TEI) would enable difficulty in achieving the recommen ded n-6:n-3 FA 
ratio. 
A meta-analysis on RCTs show ed that suppleme nting with ALA, total LC-n-3 and total n- 
6 did not reduce the relative risk for C VD  events (Chowdhury et al., 2014). Ano ther meta- 
analysis also concurred that n-3 supplement ation did not result in a significant reduction in 
overall CVD events, all-cause mortality and CVD death (Kwak et al., 2012). 
A review by Simopoulos (2008) discussed the effect of n-6:n-3 ratio on secondary CVD 
prevention, indicating that a ratio lower than 4:1 is associated with a 70% decrease in total 
m ortality. Howe ver, n-3 is not comm on in the daily diet as indicated in urban India (n-6:n-3 
ratio= 38-50) (Pella et al., 2003), the United States (n-6:n-3 ratio= 16.74) (Eaton et al., 199 8), U K 
and Northern Europe (n-6:n-3 ratio=15.0) (Sanders, 2000) while only Japan wh ere fish 
consumption is very high had the lowest ratio (n-6:n-3 ratio=4.0) (Sugano & Hirahara, 2000) 
Therefore, it is clear that a suppleme ntary dose of n-3 fatty acids is required for therapeutic 
effect on cardiometabolic risk lowering. LA can be found in a large quantity in vegetable oils 
compared to n-3 PUFA, which mainly comes from fish in the Malaysian diet (Appe ndices 3.2a, 
3.2b and 3.3).  
In the Malaysian context, n-6 PUFA (LA) intakes are recomme nded at 3 to 7%TEI, while 
n-3 PU F A at 0.3-1.2%TEI. This range n-3 FA intakes is recom mende d with due consideration 
to the present n-3 content of habitual Malaysian diets and the practicability of increasing the 
intake which requires substantial changes in dietary habits. 
The n-3 fatty acids intake of the average Malaysian remains low and there are several 
ways that we can remedy this, namely: [1] consuming more pulses (eg. beans, dhal), tofu and 
fishes, [2] use a cooking oil that is a blend of palm olein + n-3 rich vege table oil (eg. canola, 
soybean), and [3] to include n-3 (ALA or EPA + DHA)- rich novel foods as shown in Appendix 
3.3 in the household food basket. 
Dietary cholesterol 
Dietary guidelines in the past focused on the reduction of dietary cholesterol intake from 
the diet as a strategy in reducing CVD risk, until 2013 (NCEP Expert Panel 2002; USDA 2010). 
These guidelines were based on a positive correlation between high plasma total cholesterol 
(TC) and increased CVD risk, which form ed the basis to recommend reduced dietary cholesterol 
consumption; and became subsequently a highly advocated strategy in lowering the morbidity 
and mor tality of CVD (Goodman 1991). Nevertheless, the Finnish Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta- 
Carotene Cancer Prevention Study reported that a higher dietary cholesterol intake did not 
79 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
correlate with higher rates of CH D events and CH D m ortality when com paring the highest 
(median=768 m g) with the lowest (median=390 mg) quintiles of cholesterol intake (Pietinen 
et al., 1997). Previously, the AH A in the ATP III Guide lines recomme nded not exceeding a daily 
consumpt ion of 300 mg of dietary cholesterol by healthy peop le wh ilst ≤200 mg was 
recomm ended for individuals with hypercholesterolemia (F rolkis et al., 2002) as well as those 
w ith MS (Grundy et al., 2004). 
W hen the earlier dietary recomm endation was to reduce dietary cholesterol consumption, 
egg consumpt ion was often perceived as a health risk (NC EP Expert Panel 2002; NC CF N 2010) 
based on a greater consumption of eggs  been linked to higher CVD risk (M ann et al., 199 7; 
Nakamura et al., 2004). A recent meta-analysis of 22 prospective cohorts (n=558,700 subjects) 
followe d between 6 to 20 years (Shin et al. 2013), did not establish any association between egg 
consum ption and CVD  in a healthy population. Consumption was assessed in terms  of ≥1 egg 
per day compared to <1 egg per week. Ho wever, a significant effect was noted in studies 
involving diabetic patients consuming ≥1 egg per day with increased risk of CVD compared to 
those consum ing <1 egg per week (HR= 1.69, 95% CI : 1.09, 2.62). Another meta-analysis 
associated consumption of ≥3 eggs per week with a significantly higher risk for Type-2 diabetes 
in US studies but this effect was not evident for non-US studies (Djousse et al. 2016).   
The M alaysian Dietary Guidelines, w hich w as published in 2010, still recomme nds a 
restricted dietary cholesterol intake of <300 mg per day as a goal in plasma cholesterol reduction 
(NC CF N, 2010). Du e to the lack of evidence from  clinical studies showing a benefit from dietary 
cholesterol reduction, the recent Adult Treatme nt Panel (ATP) IV guidelines of the American 
H eart Association (Eckel et al. 2013) only focused on reducing SF A (5 to 6 %TEI) and avoiding 
trans-fat. USDA 2015 has also removed the cholesterol intake recomme ndation from the list of 
‘nutrients of concern’. However, it is impo rtant to highlight that this guideline is meant for a 
healthy population. 
The TSC recommen ds remo ving the restriction on dietary cholesterol intake for a healthy 
population. However, it must be cautioned that dietary cholesterol-rich foods such as beef, pork 
and shellfish also carry significant content of SFA, which are known to increase TC and LDL-C 
levels (F attore et al. 2014; Sun et al. 2015). 
3.7b D ietary fats requirements and recommended intakes 
The previous RN I 2005 recommended d ietary macronutrient distribution to be 55- 
70%TEI from carbohydrate, 20-30%TEI from fat and 10-15%TEI from protein (NCCF N, 2005). 
The setting for 20-30%TEI for fat originates from MDG 1 999 (NC CFN, 1999). These dietary fat 
levels are within the range of 15-30% energy recomm ended by several WHO/FAO Expert 
C onsultations over the years. This Technical Sub-Committe e (TSC) has reviewed the prevailing 
global recom m endations (USD A 2015; PHE, 2016; PHC, 2016) as well as the chronic disease 
burden from NCD s, which originate from the twin burdens of insulin resistance and atherogenic 
risk (IP H, 2015) thus implicating not just fats but also carbohydrates (PHC, 2016). At the high 
end, the TSC notes that the FAO (2010) reports consider a relatively high fat intake of 35%TEI 
as acceptable for an active person. Given the upper limit for safety for fat consumption is 
35%TEI  (FAO, 2010) and limits below 25%TEI wh ich w ould increase the carbohydrate load 
(Siri-Tarino et al., 2010; Appel et al., 2005), the recomme nded range for fat in terms of the total 
80 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
daily diet consumed should fall within these safety limits for health for a normal population. 
How ever, the overall recommendation for adults will be restricted to a conservative range of 25 
to 30%TEI from fats with an upper limit of 35%TEI from fats for active persons. For children 
and adolescent (up to age of 18 years) the recomm ended range  for fat intake will be broader 
between 25 to 35%TEI. 
Palm oil is extensively used in locally processed foods as well as comm ercial and home 
food preparations. By consuming palm olein alone, at 30%TEI, an individual inge sts sufficient 
LA (3-4%TEI EFA), 12%TEI saturated and 14%TEI monounsaturated fatty acids as well as other 
m icronutrients such as vitamin A and E. Therefore, the predisposition for a high saturated intake 
(>10%TEI) will need to be addressed for individuals who are hypercholesterolemic. 
The requirement to increase n-6 PUFA is addressed separately below in this section. 
The RNI 2005 recommended 0.3-1.2 %TEI of n-3 PUFA  (NCC FN, 2005) whereas W HO 
recom mends 0.5-2.0 %TEI of n-3 PUFA for healthy adults (FAO, 2010). Sufficient n-3 PU FA is 
possible with regular consumption of fish more than 3 times a week, which roughly provides 
at least 0.3%TEI as observed in a human trial (Karupaiah et al., 2016). A range in n-3 PUFA 
intakes is recommen ded with due consideration to the present n-3 content of habitual Malaysian 
diets, and the practicability of increasing the intake which requires substantial changes in dietary 
habits. Appendices 3.2a, 3.2b and 3.3 provide the distribution of the different fatty acid classes 
in foods commonly consumed by Malaysians. 
Fat is an essential nutrient and its dietary level should not fall too low, otherwise the diet 
prepared becomes monotonous, has low palatability, low energy density, and the amount of 
EFA or LA can become limiting in the overall diet. 
Infants 
Breast milk is the preferred source of nutrition for infants. Hum an milk provides 50-60% 
of its energy as fat with 5% energy as EFA (LA + ALA) and 1% energy as LCFAs. During lactation 
in well-nourished mothers, milk fat contribution increases from 40-50g/litre at three weeks  to 
60-70g/litre by 4-6 months (FAO /WHO , 1994).  
There is convincing evidence that during the first six m onths of life, total dietary fat 
should contribute 40-60 %TEI to cover the energy needed for growth and the fat required for 
tissue deposition (FAO, 2010). There is convincing evidence that from age 6-24 months, fat 
intake should be reduced gradually, depending on the physical activity of the child, to ~35%TEI 
in line with the upper limit for adult recommendations (FAO, 2010). 
The absolute amount of dietary fat recommen ded per day by the TSC for the 0 to 5 
mont hs age group are calculated based on the current proposed Malaysian RNI for energy (470 
kcal for boys aged 0 to 2 months; 540 kcal for boys aged 3 to 5 months; 420 kcal for girls aged 
0 to 2 months; 500 kcal for girls aged 3 to 5 months) with 40 - 60 %TEI contributed by fat 
calories. During weaning, the fat component should provide ~35% of the energy (FA O, 2010). 
This means that complementary foods used during the weaning period should include adequate 
amoun ts of fats and oils as the breast milk component of the diet declines. Therefore, the 
81 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
absolute am ounts of dietary fat recommended per day by the TSC for the 6 to 11 months age 
group are calculated based on the current proposed M alaysian RNI for energy (630 kcal for 
boys aged 6 to 8 months; 720 kcal for boys aged 9 to 11 m onths; 570 kcal for girls aged 6 to 
8 months; 660kcal for girls aged 9 to 11 months) with 30 - 40 %TEI as fat calories.   
RNI for infants 
Boys 
0 - 2 months 21 - 31 g/day 
3 - 5 months 24 - 36 g/day 
6 - 8 months 21 - 28 g/day 
9 - 11 months 24 - 32 g/day 
G irls 
0 - 2 months 19 - 28 g/day 
3 - 5 months 22 - 33 g/day 
6 - 8 months 19 - 25 g/day 
9 - 11 months 22 - 29 g/day 
Children and adolescents 
The range of 25 to 35 %TEI as fat calories for these age groups are calculated from the 
current proposed energy requirements for younger age groups (980 kcal for boys aged 1 to 3 
years; 1300 kcal for boys aged 4 to 6 years; 1750 kcal for boys aged 7 to 9 years; 900 kcal for 
girls aged 1 to 3 years; 1210 kcal for girls aged 4 to 6 years; 1610 kcal for girls aged 7 to 9 
years). The new  recommendat ion adopted from  FAO (2010) coupled with epidem iological 
evidence of a significant progression of the obesity epidemic in young children by Broyles et 
al. (2015) supports the need to restrict the percentage of fat intake to <35%TEI to facilitate 
energy balance without undue increase in body fat. 
RNI for children     
Boys 1 - 3 years 27 - 38 g/day  
4 - 6 years 36 - 51 g/day 
7 - 9 years 49 - 68 g/day 
G irls 1 - 3 years 25 - 35 g/day  
4 - 6 years 34 - 47 g/day 
7 - 9 years 45 - 63 g/day 
For adolescent boys and girls (10 to 18 years), who are more active than adults, 25 - 35% 
of the unwe ighted means for daily energy requirements (1930 kcal for boys aged 10 to 12 years; 
2210 kcal for boys aged 13 to 15 years; 2340 kcal for boys aged 16 to 18 years; 1710 kcal for 
girls aged 10 to 12 years; 1810 kcal for girls aged 13 to 15 years; 1890 kcal for girls aged 16 
to 18 years) were used to calculate the absolute amounts in grams of fat required per day. 
82 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
RN I for adolescents 
Boys 10 - 12 years 54 - 75 g/day  
13 - 15 years 61 - 86 g/day 
16 - 18 years 65 - 91 g/day 
Girls 10 - 12 years 48 - 67 g/day  
13 - 15 years 50 - 70 g/day 
16 - 18 years 53 - 74 g/day 
Adults and elderly 
Dietary intervention studies have shown low fat diets (<25% TEI) would lower serum 
HD L-C  and increase TG levels, as well as lower insulin sensitivity compared to extremely high 
fat diets (>55%TEI) (Volek et al., 2009). A meta-analyses of edible vegetable oils in human 
consum ption inclusive of palm oil concludes intervention studies providing <35% TEI as fats did 
not significantly increase blood LDL-C levels regardless of fats been saturated or unsaturated 
(Fattore et al., (2014). However, the overall fat recommendation is restricted to a conservative 
range of 25 to 30 %TEI with an upper limit of 35%TEI for active persons. 
For adults 19 to 59 years of age, 25 to 30 % of the unweighted means for daily energy 
requirem ents (2240 kcal for men aged 19 to 29 years; 2190 kcal for men aged 30 to 59 years; 
1840 kcal for wome n aged 19 to 29 years; 1900 kcal for women  aged 30 to 59 years) were 
used to calculate the recommended daily amounts of dietary fat.  For the elderly, the 
recom me nded fat intake was compu ted based on energy requirements of 2030 kcal for men and 
1770 kcal for women. 
RN I for adults 
Men 19 - 29 years 62 - 75 g/day  
30 - 59 years 61 - 73 g/day 
Women 19 - 29 years 51 - 61 g/day  
30 - 59 years 53 - 63 g/day 
RN I for elderly 
Men ≥ 60 years 56 - 68 g/day  
Women ≥ 60 years 49 - 59 g/day  
83 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
Pregnancy and lactation 
Fat is used for energy as well as critical building material for membr anes (F AO, 2010). 
During pregnancy, there is an additional requireme nt for dietary fat to provide for maternal fat 
storage during the early trimester, and subsequent uterine grow th, preparative developme nt of 
the mam mary glands, the expansion of blood volume, and placental and foetal growth in the 
second and third trimesters (F AO /WHO ,199 4). Ho wever, there is no indication that 
recomm endations for dietary total fat intake, expressed as a percentage of energy intake, need 
to differ in pregnancy and lactation from those for non-pregnant, non-lactating women (Koletzko 
et al., 2007). Although the recomm ended  range  of dietary fat rema ins at 25 - 30 % energy 
during pregnancy, the increased dietary fat need s are reflected in the higher daily energy 
requirement s currently proposed for the first (+80 kcal), second (+280 kcal) and third (+470 
kcal) trimesters (see Chapter 2 on Energy). Similarly, the increased dietary fat needs correspond 
to the proposed addition of 500 kcal per day for lactation during the first 6 months. 
RNI for  
Pregnancy, 1 st trimester             54 - 65 g/day 
Pregnancy, 2 nd trimester 60 - 71 g/day 
Pregnancy, 3 rd trimester 65 - 78 g/day 
Lactation, 1 st 6 months 66 - 79 g/day 
Recomm endation for Linoleic Acid (LA) intake of infants (0 to 24 months) 
The essential fatty acids, LA (18:2, n-6) and ALA (18:3, n-3) which cannot be 
physiologically-synthesized are specifically critical in the diet of infants from birth to 2 years 
(refer to section 3.5). Fu rther DH A, which can be synthesized from ALA, is also considered 
conditionally essential for the first six mont hs as it plays a critical role in normal retinal and brain 
developm ent (FAO 2010). The total diet should provide infants with at least 3.0 to 4.5 %TEI 
from  LA and 0.4 to 0.6 %TEI from ALA to meet essential fatty acids requirement. 
0 to 6 mont hs 
Since the primary food source for this age group is human  milk, it is conventional to 
base the recommendation on the fatty acid compos ition of huma n milk (Appendix 3.4). There 
is convincing evidence that adequate intake for DHA is 0.1 to 0.18 %TEI and for both AA and 
ALA to be 0.2 to 0.3 %TEI (FAO 2010). Optimal maternal milk feeding is sufficient to meet these 
requirement s. 
6  to 24 months 
There is convincing evidence that the adequate intake for EFAs for optimal growth and 
developme nt of this age group to be 3.0 to 4.5 % of TEI for LA and 0.4 to 0.6%TEI for ALA (FAO 
2010). The upper acceptable macronutrient distribution range sugge sted by FAO (2010) for LA 
is <10%TEI and for ALA is <3%TEI at a probable level of evidence. The adequate intake for DHA 
is 10-12 mg/kg at a probable level of evidence. 
84 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
Recom mendat ion for children 2 to 18 years as regards to other fatty acids 
FAO  (2010) suggests that there is probable evidence to recomme nd an adequate intake range 
of EPA + DHA intake targeted at preventing chronic disease (adjusted for age) of: 
100 - 150 mg for 2 to 4 years 
150 - 200 mg for 4 to 6 years 
200 - 300 mg for 6 to 10 years 
How ever, the currently available evidence does not permit defining an age-specific 
quantitative estimate of recommended nutrient intake for EPA + DHA for children aged 2-18 
years. There is currently insufficient evidence to link increased intake levels of DHA and/or EPA 
to improved physical or mental developmen t or specific functional benefits in children 2-18 
years of age (FAO, 2010) 
Recom mendat ion for Linoleic Acid (LA) intake for adults 
The minimum requirem ent for EFA in hum ans to prevent biochem ical and clinical 
evidence of EFA deficiency is 1-2% TEI. For infants and adults, a dietary intake of at least 3%TEI 
of LA is considered adequate (FAO/WHO, 1977). 
During pregnancy, the additional dema nd for uterine, placental and foetal growth, 
together with the increased maternal blood volume and mammary gland development, raises 
the EFA requiremen t by 1.5%TEI in the maternal diet, adding up to a total of at least 4.5%TEI 
EFA. 
Perinatal health effects of LCFAs have been most closely associated with improveme nt 
of infant visual and cognitive function, treatment and prevention of maternal depression, and 
slight increases in gestational length to reduce the prevalence of prema turity (F AO , 2010). Long- 
term consequences of the impact of preformed DHA and AA intake for mot hers and infants 
have also been found to be either showing neutral or positive effects on health outcome . In 
addition, there is compe lling evidence showing intake of DH A and EPA  and of AA combined 
with DH A are not associated with toxicity for mothers, infants or children. Therefore, average 
nutrient requirement for DHA is suggested to be 200mg per day w ith an upper nutrient limit of 
1.0g per day based on no observed adverse effect level in randomised controlled trials. Further, 
based on minimu m adult acceptable macronutrient distribution range and an increme nt for 
energy demands of pregnancy and lactation, a combined intake of DHA + EPA of 300 mg pe r 
day is recom mended by FAO  (2010) with an upper nutrient limit of 2.7 g per day. The upper 
nutrient limit for AA is suggested to be 800 mg day while trans-fat should be kept as low as 
practical. 
As for other fatty acids, there is no compelling evidence showing energy requirements 
from  saturated, monounsaturated or total polyunsaturated is different in pregnancy and 
lactation. Therefore, no changes are recommended on acceptable macronutrient distributions 
for these nutrients (FAO, 2010). 
85 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
In summary, this RN I for dietary fat intake for Malaysians Recomme ndations, as provided in 
Appendix 3.5: 
• Re vised the minimum recomm ended  intake for fat from 20 to 25%TEI with an upper 
limit of 30%TEI and introduced an upper safe limit of 35%TEI for active adults. 
• Proposed that for children and teenagers under 18 years the range has been set as 25 
to 35%TEI. 
• Maintained the recom men ded distribution of saturated fatty acids to be less than 10%TEI, 
m onounsaturated fatty acids to be between 12 to 15%TEI, n-6 polyunsaturated fatty 
acids to be between 3 to 7%TEI and n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids to be between 0.3 
to 1.2%TEI.    
• Specifically offers no recom mendation for limits on dietary cholesterol intake for a 
healthy population, with caution that dietary cholesterol-rich foods such as beef, pork and 
shellfish also carry significant content of SFA which are known to increase TC and LDL- 
C  levels. 
3.8 Research recommendations 
The lack of local data linking the effect of dietary fatty acids intake with obesity, 
cardiovascular disease and diabetes m ellitus are challenge s in determining the appropriate 
recomm endations for dietary intake for Malaysians. Cur rently, NHMS only reports the health 
status and prevalence of pre-disease stage, such as hypercholesterolem ia, whereas MANS only 
reported the dietary intake patterns of healthy Malaysian population. No large-scale population 
studies in Malaysia have correlated the effects of dietary intake patterns with health outcomes. 
Below is the direction of future research required in M alaysia to m ake appropriate 
recomm endations for fat intake. 
1. Population-based prospective cohorts to evaluate the effect of dietary fat intake, 
specifically SFA  and the type of SFA , MUFA  and PUF A on CV D, obesity and diabetes 
m ellitus. 
2. RCTs to compare the effect of substituting dietary fat with carbohydrate or protein in 
iso-caloric diets. 
3. Retrospective studies to investigate the dietary fat intake among CVD patients. 
86 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
3.9 References 
Abd Aziz N, Azlan A, Ismail A, Mohd Alinafiah S & Razman  M R (2013). Quantitative 
determination of fatty acids in marine fish and shellfish from warm water of Straits of 
Malacca for nutraceutical purposes. Biomed  Res Int Article ID 284329:1-12. 
Ahm ad NI, Wan M ahiyuddin WR, Tengku Mohamad TR, Link CY, Daud SF, Che Hussein N, 
Abdullah NA, Shaharudin R & Sulaiman LH (2016). Fish consum ption pattern amo ng 
adults of different ethnics in Peninsular Malaysia. Food Nutr Res 60:32697.  
Appel LJ, Sacks FM, Carey VJ, Ob arzanek E, Swain JF, Miller III ER, Conlin PR, Erlinger TP , 
Ros ner BA, Laranjo NM , Charleston J, McCarron P , Bishop LM, for the Om niHeart 
Collaborative Research Group (2005). Effects of protein, monounsaturated fat, and 
carbohydrate intake on blood pressure and serum  lipids: Results of the O m niHeart 
Random ized Trial. JAMA 294:2455-2464. 
Astrup A, Grunwald GK, Saris WH M & Hill JO (2000). The role of low-fat diets in body weight 
control: a me ta-analysis of ad libitum dietary intervention studies. Int J Obesity 24:1545- 
1552. 
Barr LH, Dunn GD & Brennan MF (1981). Essential fatty acid deficiency during total parenteral 
nutrition. Ann Surg 193:304-311. 
Bray GA , Lovejoy JC, Smith SR, DeLany JP , Lefevre M, Hwang D, Ryan DH & York DA (2002). 
The influence of different fats and fatty acids on obesity, insulin resistance and 
inflamm ation. J Nutr 132:2488-2491. 
Broyles ST, Denstel KD , Church TS, Chapu t JP , Fogelholm  M, H u G , Kuriyan R, Kurpad A, 
Lamb ert EV, Maher C & Maia J (2015). The epidemio logical transition and the global 
childhood obesity epidemic. Int J Obes Suppl 5:S3-S8. 
Burdge G  (2004). _-linolenic acid me tabolism in men and women:  nutritional and biological 
implications. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 7:137-144.  
Burdge GC &  Wo otton SA (2002). Conversion of α-linolenic acid to eicosapen taeno ic, 
docosapentaenoic and docosahexaenoic acids in young women. Br J Nutr 88:411-420. 
Bu rdge GC,  Jones AE & Wootton SA (2002). Eicosapentaenoic and docosapentaenoic acids are 
the principal products of α-linolenic acid metabolism in young men. Br J Nutr 88:355- 
364.   
Calder PC (2013). n-3 fatty acids, inflammation and immunity: new  mechanisms to explain old 
actions. Proc Nutr Soc 72:326-336.  
Chee SS, Ismail M N, Ng KK & Zawiah, H (1997). Food intake assessment of adults in rural and 
urban areas from four selected regions in Malaysia. Mal J Nutr 3:91-102. 
87 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
C howdhur y R, Stevens S, Gorman D, Pan A, Wa rnakula S, Chow dhury S, W ard H, Johnson L, 
C rowe F  & Hu FB (2012). Association between fish consumption, long chain ome ga 3 
fatty acids, and risk of cerebrovascular disease: system atic review  and me ta-analysis. 
BMJ 345:e6698. 
C howdhur y R, Warnakula S, Kunutsor S, Crowe  F, Ward HA, Johnson L, Franco OH, Butterworth 
AS, Forouhi NG , Thompson SG, Khaw  KT, Mozaffarian D, Danesh J & Ange lantonio ED 
(2014). Association of dietary, circulating, and supplemen t fatty acids with coronary risk. 
Ann Intern Med 160:398-406. 
Djousse L, Khawaja OA & G aziano JM (2016). Egg consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes: a 
m eta-analysis of prospective studies. Am J Clin Nutr 103:474-480. 
Dubois V, Breton S, Linder M, Fanni J & Parmentier M (2007). Fatty acid profiles of 80 vegetable 
oils with regard to their nutritional potential. Euro J Lipid Science & Technology 109: 710- 
732. 
Eaton SB, Eaton SB III, Sinclair AJ, Cordain L & Mann NJ (1998). Dietary intake of long-chain 
polyunsaturated fatty acids during the Paleolithic. Wo rld Rev Nutr Diet 83:12-23. 
Eckel RH, Jakicic JM, Ard JD, de Jesus JM, Miller NH, Hubbard VS, Lee I-Min, Lichtenstein AH, 
Loria CM , Millen BE, Nonas CA, Sacks FM, Smith SC, Svetkey LP , Wadden TA & Yonovski 
SZ (2013). ATP IV. 2013 AHA /AC C Guid eline on lifestyle m anagemen t to reduce 
cardiovascular risk - A report of the Am erican Co llege of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation 129:S 76-S99. 
Eng JY & Moy  FM (2011). Validation of a food frequency questionnaire to assess dietary 
cholesterol, total fat and different types of fat intakes among Malay adults. Asia Pacific 
J Clin Nutr 20:639-645. 
FA O  (2010). Fats and Fatty Acids in Human Nutrition: Report of An Expert Consultation. FAO 
Food and Nutrition Paper No. 91, Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome. 
F AO (2011). Food Supply - Crop s Prim ary E quivalent. Available at 
http://faostat3.fao.org/download/FB/CC/E [12 June 2015]. 
FA O /WH O  (1977). Dietary fats and oils in human nutrition. A Joint FAO/WHO Re port, Food and 
Nutrition Paper No. 3. Food and Agricultural Organisation, Rome. 
F AO/WHO (1994). Fats and oils in human nutrition. Rep ort of a Joint FAO/WHO  Expert 
C onsultation.  Food and Nutrition Paper 57. Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome. 
F attore E, Bosetti C, Brighenti F, Agostoni C & Fattore G (2014). Palm oil and blood lipid-related 
m arkers of cardiovascular disease: a systema tic review  and me ta-analysis of dietary 
intervention trials. Am J Clin Nutr 99:1331-50. 
Flock MR, Harris W S & Kris-Etherton PM  (2013). Long-chain om ega-3 fatty acids: time to 
establish a dietary reference intake. Nutr Rev 71:692-707.  
88 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
Frolkis JP , Pearce G L & Sprecher DL (2002). Implications of 2001 cholesterol treatm ent 
guidelines based on a retrospective analysis of a high-risk patient cohort. Am  J 
Cardiology 89:765-766. 
G iltay EJ, Gooren LJ, Toorians AW, Katan MB & Zock PL (2004). Docosahexaenoic acid 
concentrations are higher in women than in men because of estrogenic effects. Am  J Clin 
Nu tr 80:1167-1174. 
Goodm an DS (1991). The National Cholesterol Education Program:  guidelines, status, and 
issues. Am  J Med 90:32S-35S. 
Gr opper SS  & Smith JL (2012). Advanced nutrition and human metabolism. Cha pter 6. Lipids. 
4th Ed. Thomson Wadsworth. 
Gr undy SM & Denke MA (1990). Dietary influences on serum lipids and lipoproteins. J Lipid 
Res 31:1149-1172. 
Gr undy SM, Hansen B, Smith SC Jr, Cleeman JI & Khan RA (2004). Clinical management of 
met abolic syndrom e: report of the American He art Association/ National Heart, Lung, 
and Blood Institute/ Am erican Diabetes Association conference on scientific issues 
related to management. Circulation 109:551-56. 
Guarnieri M & Johnson RM (1970). The essential fatty acids. Adv Lipid Res 8:115-174. 
Gunsto ne FD, Harw ood JL & Dijkstra AJ (2007). The Lipid Handbook w ith CD-ROM. CRC Press, 
New  York. 
Harris WS, Sands SA, Windsor SL, Ali HA, Stevens TL, Magalski A, Porter CB & Borkon AM 
(2004). Om ega-3 fatty acids in cardiac biopsies from  heart transplantation patients: 
correlation with erythrocytes and response to supplementation. Circulation 110:1645- 
1649.  
Hegsted DM, McGandy RB, Myers ML & Stare MJ (1965). Quantitative effects of dietary fat on 
serum  cholesterol in man. Am J Clin Nutr 17:281-295. 
Holm an RT (1971). Essential fatty acid deficiency. Prog Chem Fats Other Lipids, 9:275-348. 
Innis SM (2008). Dietary omega 3 fatty acids and the developing brain. Brain Res 1237:35-43. 
IPH  (Institute for Public He alth) (2011). National Health and Mo rbidity Survey 2011 (NH MS 
2011). Vol. II: Non Communi cable Diseases. Institute for Public Health, National Institutes 
of Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
IPH  (Institute for Public Health) (2014). National Health and Morbidity Survey 2014: Malaysian 
Adult Nutrition Survey (MANS ) Vol. II: Survey. Institute for Public Health, National 
Institutes of Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
89 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
IPH  (Institute for Public Health) (2015). N ational Health and Morbidity Survey 2015 (NHMS 
2015). Vol. II: Non -Co mmu nicable Diseases, Risk F actors & Other H ealth Problems. 
Institute for Public He alth, National Institutes of Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, 
Kuala Lumpur. 
Jakobsen MU, O’Reilly EJ, Heitmann BL, Pereira MA, Balter K, Fraser GE, Goldbourt U, Hallmans 
G , Knekt P , Liu S, Pietinen P , Spiegelman D, Stevens J, Virtamo J, Willet WC & Ascherio 
A (2009). Major types of dietary fat and risk of coronary heart disease: a pooled analysis 
of 11 cohort studies. Am J Clin Nutr 89:1-8. 
Jeejeebhoy KN, Detsky AS & Baker JP (1990 ). Assessm ent of nutritional status. J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 14:193S-196S. 
Jeppesen PB, Hoy CE & Mortensen PB (2000). Deficiency of essential fatty acids, vitamin A 
and E and changes in plasma lipoproteins in patients w ith reduced fat absorption or 
intestinal failure. Euro J Clin Nutr 54:632-642. 
Karupaiah T & Sundram K (2007). Effects of stereospecific positioning of fatty acids in the 
triacylglycerol structures of native and random ized fat: a review of their health 
implications. Nutr Metab 4:16. 
Karupaiah T, C huah KA, Chinna K, Matsuoka R, Masuda Y, Sundram K & Sugano M (2016). 
C ompa ring effects of soybean oil and palm olein-based mayonnaise consumption on the 
plasma lipid and lipoprotein profiles in hum an subjects: a double-blind random ized 
controlled trial with cross-over design. Lipids Health Dis 15:131 
Karupaiah T, Noor MI & Sundram K (2005). D ietary fatty acids and their influence on blood 
lipids and lipoproteins. In. Akoh, C.C. & Lai O-M (eds). Healthful Lipids, pg. 171-203. 
C hampaign, Illinois, USA: AOCS Press. 
Karupaiah T, Tan HK , Ong WW , Tan, C.H . & Sundram, K (2014). Trans fatty acid content in 
Ma laysian supermarket foods: a field-to-laboratory approach in assessing food risk. 
Food Additives & Contaminants: Part A 31:1375-1384. 
Katan MB, Zock, PL & Mensink RP (1994). Effects of fats and fatty acids on blood lipids in 
hum ans: an overview. Am J Clin Nutr 60:1017S-1022S. 
Koletzko B, Cetin I & Brenna JT (2007). Dietary fat intakes for pregnant and lactating women. 
Br J Nutr 98: 873-877. 
Koletzko B, Lien E, Agostoni C, Bohles H, Campoy C, Cetin I, Decsi T, Dudenhausen JW, Dupont 
C , Forsyth S, Hoesli I, Holzgreve W, Lapillonne A, Putet G, Secher NJ, Symonds M, 
Szajew ska H, Willatts P & Uauy R (2008). The roles of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty 
acids in pregnancy, lactation and infancy: review of current knowledge and consensus 
recomm endations. J Perinat Med 36:5-14. 
90 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
Kris-Etherton PM, Krum mel D, Russell ME, Dreon D, Mackey S, Borchers J & Wood PD (1988). 
The effect of diet on plasma lipids, lipoproteins and coronary heart disease. J Am Diet 
Assoc 88:1373-1400. 
Kw ak SM, Myung SK, Lee YJ & Seo HG (2012). Efficacy of omega-3 fatty acid supplements 
(Eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaeno ic acid) in the secondary prevention of 
cardiovascular disease - A meta-analysis of randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
trials. Arch Intern Med 172:686-694. 
Manderson L & Naemiratch B (2010). From Jollibee To Beebee: “Lifestyle” And Chronic Illness 
In Southeast Asia. Asia-Pacific J Public Health 22:117S-124S. 
Mann JI, Appleby PN, Key TJ & Thorogood M (1997). Dietary determ inants of ischaemic heart 
disease in health conscious individuals. Heart 78:450-455. 
M ente A, Koning LD, Shannon HS & Anand SS (2009). A systema tic review of the evidence 
supporting a causal link between dietary factors and coronary heart disease. Arch Intern 
Me d 169:659-669. 
Mirnalini K, Zalilah MS, Safiah MY, Tahir A, Siti Haslinda MD, Siti Rohana D, Khairul Zarina MY, 
Hasyami M & Normah H (2008). Energy and nutrient intakes: findings from the Malaysian 
Adult Nutrition Survey (MANS). Mal J Nutr 14:1-24. 
Moz affarian D & Clarke R (2009). Q uantitative effects on cardiovascular risk factors and 
coronary heart disease risk of replacing partially hydrogenated vegetable oils with other 
fats and oils. Euro J Clin Nutr 63:S22-S33. 
Nakamura Y, Okamura T, Tamaki S, Kadowaki T, Hayakawa T, Kita Y, Okayama A & Ueshima H 
(2004). Egg consumption, serum cholesterol, and cause-specific and all-cause mortality: 
the National Integrated Project for Prospective Observation of Non-comm unicable 
Disease and Its Trends in the Aged, 1980 (NIPPON DATA80). Am J Clin Nutr 80:58-63. 
NC CFN  (1999). Ma laysian Dietary Guidelines. National Coo rdinating Committee  on Food and 
Nutrition, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
NC CFN  (2005). Recommended Nutrient Intakes for Malaysia 2005: A Report of the Technical 
Wo rking Group on Nutritional Guidelines. National Coordinating Committee on Food and 
Nutrition, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
NC CFN  (2010). Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2010. National Coor dinating Committee on Food 
and Nutrition, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
NC EP Expert Panel (2002). Third report of the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) 
expert panel on detection, evaluation, and treatment of high blood cholesterol in adults 
(Adult Treatment Panel III) final report. Circulation 106: 3143. 
Ng TKW  (1995). Towards improved fat intake and nutrition for Malaysians. Mal J Nutr 1:21-30. 
91 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
Nguyen TTP , Bhandari B, Cichero J & Prakash S (2015). A compr ehensive review on in vitro 
digestion of infant formula. Food Research Intern 76:373-386. 
Nordman  AJ, Nordman A, Briel M, Keller U, Yancy WS, Brehm BJ & Bucher HC  (2006). Effects 
of low -carbohydrate vs low-fat diets on we ight loss and cardiovascular risk factors: a 
m eta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Arch Intern Med 166:285-293. 
NSP -NCD  MOH (2010). National Strategic Plan for Non-com municable Disease: Medium Term 
Strategic Plan to Further Strengthen the Cardiovascular Diseases & Diabetes Prevention 
& Control Program in Malaysia (2010-2014). Non-comm unicable Disease Section, 
Disease Control Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
O rsavova J, Misurcova L, Ambrozova JV, Vicha R & Mlcek J (2015). Fatty acids composition of 
vegetable oils and its contribution to dietary energy intake and depen dence of 
cardiovascular mortality on dietary intake of fatty acids. Inter J Mo lecular Sciences 16: 
12871-12890. 
Otten OJ, Hellwig JP , Meyers LD (2006). Dietary Reference Intakes: The Essential Guide to 
N utrient Req uirements. Institute of Medicine of the National Academ ies, Wa shington 
DC . 
Pan A, Chen M , C howdhury R, Wu JHY, Sun Q , Campos  H, Mozaffarian D & Hu F B (2012). _- 
Linolenic acid and risk of cardiovascular disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Am J Clin Nutr 96:1262-73. 
Pella D, Dubnov G, Singh RB, Sharma R, Berry EM (2003). Effects of an Indo-Mediterranean 
diet on the omega-6/om ega-3 ratio in patients at high risk of coronary artery disease. The 
Indian Paradox. W orld Rev Nutr Diet 92: 74-80. 
PHC  (Public Health Collaboration) (2016). Healthy Eating G uidelines & W eight Loss Advice for 
the United Kingdom. Inform ing & Imp lemen ting H ealthy Decisions. Available at 
https://phcuk.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/Healthy-Eating-Gu idelines-Weight-Loss- 
Advice-For-The-United-Kingdom-Public-Health-Collaboration.pdf 
PHE (Public Health England) (2016). The Eatwell Guide. Gateway Numb er: 2015588. NHS 
C hoices. Available at http://www.nhs.uk/Livewell/Goo dfood/Pages/theeatwell-guide.aspx 
Pietinen P , Ascherio A, Korhonen P , Hartman AM, Willet WC, Albanes D & Virtamo J (1997). 
Intake of fatty acids and risk of coronary heart disease in a cohort of Finnish men - The 
Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention Study. Am J Epidemiol 145:876- 
887. 
Popkin BM (2006). Global nutrition dynamics: the world is shifting rapidly toward a diet linked 
w ith noncommunicable diseases. Am J Clin Nutr 84: 289-98. 
92 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
Rahm an J, Zulkifli S, Zakaria S, Kama ruddin MA, Jalal NA, Ismail N, Kamil NM, Abdullah N, 
Baharudin N, Hussin NH, Othman H, Mahadi NM & the Malaysian Cohort Study Group 
(2014). Cohort profile: The Malaysian Cohort (TMC)  project: a prospective study of non- 
com muni cable diseases in a multi-ethnic population. Int J Epidemiol 44:423-31. 
Ramp al S, Mahadeva S, G uallar E, Bulgiba A, Moham ed R, Rahmat R, Arif MT & Ramp al L 
(2012). Ethnic differences in the prevalence of metabolic syndrom e: results from  a multi- 
ethnic population-based survey in Malaysia. PLo S O ne 7:e46365. 
Sanders TAB (2000). Polyunsaturated fatty acids in the food chain in Europe. Am  J Clin N utr 
71:S176-S178. 
San Giovanni JP & Chew EY (2005). The role of omega-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids 
in health and disease of the retina. Prog Retin Eye Res 24:87-138. 
Schwingshackl L & H offma nn G (2014). Monounsaturated fatty acids, olive oil and health status: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. Lipids Health Dis 13:154. 
Serhan CN & Chiang N (2013). Resolution phase lipid mediators of inflammation: agonists of 
resolution. Curr Opin Pharmacol 13:632-640. 
Shin JY, Xun PC, Nakamura Y & He K (2013). Egg consum ption in relation to risk of 
cardiovascular disease and diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Clin 
Nu tr 98:146-159. 
Simo poulos AP (19 99 ). Essential fatty acids in health and chronic disease. Am  J Clin N utr 
70:560S-9S. 
Sim opoulos AP (2008). The importance of the omega-6/omeg a-3 fatty acid ratio in 
cardiovascular disease and other chronic diseases. Exp Biol Med 233:674-688. 
Siri-Tarino PW , Sun Q, Hu FB & Krauss RM (2010). Meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies 
evaluating the association of saturated fat with cardiovascular disease. Am J Clin Nutr 
91:535-546. 
Sugano M & Hirahara F (2000). Polyunsaturated fatty acids in the food chain in Japan. Am J 
Clin Nutr 71:189S-196S. 
Sun Y, Neelakantan N, Wu Y, Lote-Oke R, Pan A & van Dam RM (2015). Palm oil consumption 
increases LDL cholesterol compared with vege table oils low in saturated fat in a meta- 
analysis of clinical trials. J Nutr 145:1549-58. 
Tee ES, Mohd Ismail N, Mohd Nasir A & Khatijah I (1997). Nu trient Compo sition of Malaysian 
Foods. 4th Edition. Kuala Lumpur: Institute for Medical Research. 
US DA (The United Stated Department of Agriculture) (2010). Dietary G uidelines for Americans 
2010. U .S. Government, Washington, DC. 
93 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
US DA  (The United Stated Departme nt of Agriculture) (2015). 2015-2020 Dietary Guidelines for 
Amer icans. 8th Edition. U.S. Departme nt of Health and Human  Services and U.S. 
Departm ent of  A griculture, D ecem ber 2015. Available at 
http://health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/guidelines/ 
Volek JS & Feinman RD (2005). Carbohydrate restriction improves the features of Metabolic 
Syndrom e. Metabolic Syndrome m ay be defined by the response to carbohydrate 
restriction. Nutr Metab 2:1-17. 
Volek JS, Phinney SD, Forsythe CE, Quann EE, Wood RJ, Puglisi MJ, Kraeme r WJ, Bibus DM, 
F ernandez ML & Feinman RD (2009). Carbohydrate restriction has a mo re favorable 
impact on the metabolic syndrome than a low fat diet. Lipids 44:297-309. 
W HO (W orld Health Organization) (2014). Global Status Report on Non-communic able 
D iseases. WHO , Geneva. 
94 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
Appendix 3.1 Fatty acid composition of selected dietary fats and oils 
Type of fats 
and oils 
C oconut oil 91.9 6.5 1.5 0.02 14.9 48.5 17.6 8.4 - 2.5 6.5 1.5 - 0.1 
Palm kernel oil 84.2 13.7 2.0 0.02 8.2 49.6 16.0 8.0 - 2.4 13.7 2.0 - 0.1 
C ocoa butter 60.4 35.6 2.9 0.05 - - 0.1 25.8 0.3 34.5 35.3 2.9 - 1.1 
Beef fat 50.6 42.1 2.8 0.06 0.1 0.1 3.3 25.5 3.4 21.6 38.7 2.2 0.6 4.6 
Shea butter 46.0 48.0 5.1 0.11 --- 5.0 - 41.0 48.0 5.1 - 0.9 
Palm oil 44.9 43.4 10.8 0.24 - 0.3 0.8 39.5 0.3 4.3 43.1 10.5 0.3 0.5 
Palm olein 42.4 44.0 11.8 0.28 - 0.2 0.8 37.2 0.4 4.2 43.6 11.5 0.3 0.3 
Lard 38.7 48.2 11.0 0.28 0.1 0.1 1.4 24.8 3.1 12.3 45.1 9.9 1.1 3.0 
O live oil 18.8 68.2 14.6 0.78 --- 16.5 1.8 2.3 66.4 13.0 1.6 0
G roundnut oil 9.6 71.2 18.2 1.89 -- 0.04 7.5 0.1 2.1 71.1 18.2 - 0.9 
C orn oil 14.2 27.8 57.1 4.02 --- 12.3 0.1 1.9 27.7 56.1 1.0 0.9 
Soybean oil 14.8 24.1 59.9 4.05 -- 0.1 10.8 0.2 3.9 23.9 52.1 7.8 1.2 
C anola oil 7.4 56.0 35.6 4.81 --- 5.6 - 1.8 56.0 25.8 9.8 1.0 
Sunflower oil 9.1 28.1 62.4 6.85 - 0.02 0.09 6.2 0.12 2.8 28.0 62.2 0.16 0.4 
Safflower oil 9.2 11.6 79.2 8.60 -- 0.1 6.7 0.1 2.4 11.5 79.0 0.15 0.1 
SFA MUFA PUFA P/S 
ratio <12:0 12:0 14:0 16:0 16:1 18:0 18:1 18:2 18:3 Others 
Notes: values represent %/100g edible fat. 
Sources: Dubois et al. (2007), Grundy & Denke (1990), Kris-Etherton et al. (1988), Orsavova et al. 
(2015), Gunstone et al. (2007), and Karupaiah et al. (2005) 
95 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
Appendix 3.2a Malaysian foods with significant content of dietary fat (g/100g) 
Food Total fat SFA M UFA PUFA TFA* 
Fishes 
Black Pomfret (Bawal Hitam) 2.3 0.94 0.14 0.71 N/A 
G iant Seaperch (Siakap) 2.7 0.13 0.23 0.93 N/A 
G olden Snapper (Jenahak) 1.3 0.42 0.94 0.51 N/A 
Indian Mackerel (Kembong) 1.8 0.59 0.3 0.19 N/A 
Silver Pomfret (Bawal Putih) 2.1 0.88 0.15 0.57 N/A 
Y ellowstripe scad (Selar Kuning) 2.1 0.83 0.29 0.14 N/A 
Shellfish 
Cockles (Kerang) 1.9 0.64 0.40 0.61 N/A 
Cuttlefish (Sotong) 1.4 0.57 0.11 0.50 N/A 
O yster (Tiram) 1.2 0.56 0.82 0.34 N/A 
Prawn (Udang) 1.1 0.31 0.11 0.46 N/A 
Nuts and Seeds 
Almond 49.4 3.7 30.9 12.1 -
H azelnut 62.4 4.5 46.6 8.5 -
Peanut 49.7 6.9 24.6 15.7 -
W alnut 59.0 3.4 15.0 35.1 -
Confectionary 
Chocolate wafer 27.3 62.3 27.9 6.4 2.72 
Cooking chocolate 33.1 80.7 15.64 2.0 1.27 
Fats, oils, spreads, dressing 
Butter 80.6 57.8 31.7 5.9 1.32 
Fat spread 73.4 36.3 39.4 23.2 0.22 
G hee 99.8 61.5 29.7 3.3 1.04 
M argarine 77 46.5 36.3 16.8 0.36 
Peanut butter 42 20.3 48.6 26.9 0.52 
Salad dressing 45 14.5 22.7 61 0.18 
Shortening 99.8 57 33.6 8.8 0.2 
Vanaspati 99.8 50.6 37.9 10.7 0.43 
D airy-based products 
Adult milk powder 25.6 58.9 30.8 5.2 1.65 
Cheese 21.5 59.8 31.6 4.6 0.78 
Children’s milk > 3 years 17.8 44.7 36.8 16.4 0.93 
Children’s milk < 1 years 27.4 39.6 40.7 18.3 0.14 
Ice cream 11.0 68.3 23.4 4.8 2.09 
Source: Tee et al. (1997), Karupaiah et al. (2014), Abd. Aziz et al. (2013) 
*relates to total TFA content as a sum of 18:1 n9t; 18:2 n6t; cis-9 t-12; t-9, cis-12; 18:3t1; 18:3t2; 18:3t4; and 
18:3t5 excluding natural isomers of conjugated linoleic acid (cis-9,t-11). 
N/A=not  available 
96 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
Appendix 3.2b Malaysian foods with significant content of dietary fat (g/100g) 
Food Total fat SFA M UFA PUFA TFA* 
Soups 
Soup, canned 45.8 10.7 54.6 32.3 0.09 
Soup, concentrates 17.0 52.0 36.3 9.0 1.94 
Snacks 
F rench fries 2.55 51.3 36.9 10.8 0.26 
F rozen Chappati/paratha 9.1 52.1 34.3 12.2 0.64 
F rozen dough 5.5 48.9 37.8 12.2 0.28 
Potato chips 32.7 38.3 45.3 15.1 0.24 
M eat & products 
Beef lean 1.1 0.6 0.4 0 N/A 
Burger patties 13 40.9 43.4 12.3 0.08 
C hicken thigh, farm with skin 3.7 1.1 1.8 0.8 N/A 
C hicken thigh, farm, without skin 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 N/A 
H en egg 8.1 2.6 4.7 0.8 N/A 
M utton 4.6 2 2.4 0.2 N/A 
Nuggets 15 43.5 42.1 13.1 0.18 
Pork fat 89.3 37.8 45.9 5.5 N/A 
Pork lean 21 7.9 11 2.1 N/A 
Prawn 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 N/A 
Sausages 13.8 31.1 45.9 21.3 0.15 
Popular Street Foods 
C har Siew Pau 15.4 7.2 7 1.2 N/A 
C hicken rice 4.6 1.8 2.1 0.7 N/A 
C urry laksa 6.4 4.4 1.4 0.6 N/A 
Dosai 0.7 0.4 0.2 0 N/A 
F ried Kueh Tiau 9.7 3.9 4.5 1.2 N/A 
F ried mee - Hokkien 6.6 2.7 3 0.9 N/A 
F ried mee - Indian style 9 5.6 2.3 1.1 N/A 
Lor Mai Kai 5 1.9 2.4 0.7 N/A 
Nasi goreng cina 13.2 5.3 6.5 1.4 N/A 
Nasi lemak 3.6 2 1.1 0.5 N/A 
Satay 10.8 3.6 4.6 2.6 N/A 
Source: Tee et al. (1997), Karupaiah et al. (2014) 
*relates to total TFA content as a sum of 18:1 n9t; 18:2 n6t; cis-9 t-12; t-9, cis-12; 18:3t1; 18:3t2; 18:3t4; 
and 18:3t5 excluding natural isomers of conjugated linoleic acid (cis-9,trans-11). 
N/A=not available 
97 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
Appendix 3.3 Local fish choices with varying fat content, Cold water fish and Overall rich sources 
of fatty acids content 
Food group Sources 
Low fat fish (<1g/100g) Kikek, bulus-bulus, toman, stingray, grouper, seluang, nyior-nyior, 
baung. 
M oderate fat fish (1-3g/100g) Dory, cencaru, black pomfret, sepat, ikan parang, tenggiri, gelama, 
jenahak, pelata, kerisi, ikan merah, selar, tilapia, belida. 
H igh fat fish (>3g/100g) Siakap, keli, patin, senangin, kembong, white pomfret. 
Deep sea cold fish Tuna, sardines, cod fish, salmon. 
SF A C oconut oil, santan, palm kernel oil, palm oil, beef, pork, milk, 
yogurt, cheese 
M U FA Olive oil, Canola oil, peanut oil, almond, peanut, hazelnut, palm oil 
n-6 PUFA Soybean oil, sunflower oil, corn oil, tofu, tempeh, walnut 
n-3 PUFA Soybean oil, Canola oil, fish, walnut 
Appendix 3.4 Composition of human breast milk in comparison to cow’s milk 
Nutrients Human breast milk 
Concentration (g/L) 
Cow’ s milk 
Concentration (g/L) 
Protein 
Total whey protein 67.3 6.3 
Im m unoglobulins 1.3 0.7 
Lactoferrin 1.5 0.1 
α-lactalbumin 1.9 1.2 
Total caseins 2.7 26 
Carbohydrate 
Lactose 67 53 
O ligosaccharides 0.05-0.20 -
Fat 32-36 33 
Triglycerides 97-98% 97% 
AA 0.35-0.70 % total fat N/A 
DH A 0.17-1.0% total fat N/A 
Source: Nguyen et al. (2015), Koletzko et al. (2008) 
98 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
Appendix 3.5 Comp arison of recomme nded intake of fat and its com ponents: RNI M alaysia (2017), 
RN I Malaysia (2005), FAO (2010) and IOM (2006) 
Nutrient Age /Life 
stage group 
Malaysia 
(2017) 
M alaysia 
(2005) a
FAO 
(2010) 
IOM 
(2006) b
g/day % TEI % TEI % TEI % TEI 
Total fat Infants (Boys) 
0 – 2 months 21 – 31 40 – 60 50 – 60 40 – 60 30 – 40 
3 – 5 months 24 – 36 40 – 60 50 – 60 40 – 60 30 – 40 
6 – 8 months 21 – 28 30 – 40 30 – 40 ~ 35 30 – 40 
9 – 11 months 24 – 32 30 – 40 30 – 40 ~ 35 30 – 40 
Infants (Girls) 
0 – 2 months 19 – 28 40 – 60 50 – 60 40 – 60 30 – 40 
3 – 5 months 22 – 33 40 – 60 50 – 60 40 – 60 30 – 40 
6 – 8 months 19 – 25 30 – 40 30 – 40 ~ 35 30 – 40 
9 – 11 months 22 – 29 30 – 40 30 – 40 ~ 35 30 – 40 
Children (Boys)  
1 – 3 years 27 – 38 25 – 35 25 – 35 25 – 35 30 – 40 
4 – 6 years 36 – 51 25 – 35 20 – 30 25 – 35 25 – 35 
7 – 9 years 49 – 68 25 – 35 20 – 30 25 – 35 25 – 35 
Children (Girls)  
1 – 3 years 25 – 35 25 – 35 25 – 35 25 – 35 30 – 40 
4 – 6 years 34 – 47 25 – 35 20 – 30 25 – 35 25 – 35 
7 – 9 years 45 – 63 25 – 35 20 – 30 25 – 35 25 – 35 
Adolescents (Boys) 
10 – 12 years 54 – 75 25 – 35 20 – 30 25 – 35 25 – 35 
13 – 15 years 61 – 86 25 – 35 20 – 30 25 – 35 25 – 35 
16 – 18 years 65 – 91 25 – 35 20 – 30 25 – 35 25 – 35 
Adolescents (Girls) 
10 – 12 years 48 – 67 25 – 35 20 – 30 25 – 35 25 – 35 
13 – 15 years 50 – 70 25 – 35 20 – 30 25 – 35 25 – 35 
16 – 18 years 53 – 74 25 – 35 20 – 30 25 – 35 25 – 35 
Adults (Men) 
19 – 29 years 62 – 75 25 – 30 c 20 – 30 20 – 35 20 – 35 
30 – 59 years 61 – 73 25 – 30 c 20 – 30 20 – 35 20 – 35 
≥60 years 56 – 68       25 – 30 20 – 30 20 – 35 20 – 35 
99 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Fats 
Adults (Women) 
19 – 29 years 51 – 61 25 – 30 c 20 – 30 20 – 35 20 – 35 
30 – 59 years 53 – 63 25 – 30 c 20 – 30 20 – 35 20 – 35 
≥60 years 49 – 59 25 – 30 20 – 30 20 – 35 20 – 35 
Pregnancy 
1st trimester 54 – 65  25 – 30 
c 20 – 30 20 – 35 20 – 30 
2nd trimester 60 – 71 25 – 30 c 20 – 30 20 – 35 20 – 35 
3rd trimester 65 – 78 25 – 30 c 20 – 30 20 – 35 20 – 35 
Lactation 
1st 6 months 66 – 79 25 – 30 c 20 – 30 20 – 35 20 – 35 
n-6 PUFA Gen eral population - 3.0 – 7.0 3.0 – 7.0 2.5 – 9.0 5 – 10 
(linoleic acid) Pregnancy - 5.0 – 7.0 5.0 – 7.0 --
Lactation - 5.0 – 7.0 5.0 – 7.0 --
n-3 PUFA Gen eral population - 0.3 – 1.2 0.3 – 1.2 0.5 – 2.0  0.6 – 1.2 
(ALA+EPA+ 
DH A) 
Saturated - < 10 < 10 10 Low 
fatty acids 
Mo nounsaturated - 12 – 15 12 – 15 By diff. -
fatty acids 
Trans fatty - < 1 < 1 < 1 Low 
acids 
Nutrient Age /Life 
stage group 
M alaysia 
(2017) 
M alaysia 
(2005) a
FAO 
(2010) 
IOM 
(2006) b
g/day % TEI % TEI % TEI % TEI 
a NCC FN (2005); b Otten et al. (2006); c for active men and women with normal BMI up to 35% TEI from fat is a 
safe limit 
100 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
4 • Carbohydrate 
4.1 Introduction 
Carbohydrates may be classified according to their degree of polyme risation (DP) and 
ma y be divided into three principal groups i.e. sugars (DP 1-2; monosaccharides, disaccharides, 
polyols), oligosaccharides (DP 3-9; malto-oligosaccharides, other oligosaccharides) and 
polysaccharides (DP  ≥10; starch, non-starch polysaccharides). Each of these three groups may 
be further subdivided on the basis of the monosaccharide com position of the individual 
carbohydrates. The FAO /WH O C onsultation (1998) pointed out that there could be several 
problems associated with the use of the term “total carbohydrates” in most food composition 
tables. Firstly the figures given are obtained “by difference” and are therefore not very accurate. 
Mor eover, a single global figure for carbohydrates in food was felt to be uninformative because 
it fails to identify the m ajor types of carbohydrates in a food and thus to allow  som e 
understanding of the potential physiological properties of these carbohydrates. 
With regard to the terms available and unavailable carbohydrates, the FAO /WHO 
Con sultation suggested that in view of the improved understanding of carbohydrate physiology, 
a more appropriate substitute for these terms would be to describe carbohydrates as glycaemic 
(i.e. providing carbohydrate for metabolism) or non-glycaem ic. The Consultation also suggested 
the use of the term “complex carbohydrate” to substitute starch is inappropriate and it is better 
to discuss carbohydrate components by using their common chemical names. 
The FAO /WH O Scientific Update in 2006 still recomme nded the main classification based 
on chemistry division, whilst recognizing that the classification should also include aspects of 
physical effects (food matrix), functional/ physiological effects and health conseque nces 
(Cu mmin gs & Stephen, 2007). This is because chem istry divisions of carbohydrate are comp lex 
and does not provide practical basis into nutritional effects, and thus lead to numer ous terms 
being employed. 
Meanw hile, European Food Safety Authority (EFSA, 2010) and Scientific Advisory 
Comm ittee on Nutrition of United Kingdom (SACN, 2015) suggested to classify carbohydrates 
based on their nutritional properties rather than their chemical characteristics: glycaemic 
carbohydrate as “carbohydrates digested and absorbed in the human small intestine”. 
Sugars are also part of carbohydrates. The term sugars is conventionally used to describe 
mono-  and di-saccharides (FAO /WHO , 1998). “Free sugars”  is a new term introduced by WHO 
and refers to all monosaccharides and disacharides added to foods and beverages by the 
manufacturer, cook or consumer, as well as to sugars naturally present in honey, syrups and 
fruit juices concentrates. Howe ver, free sugar  does not include sugars naturally present in milk 
(lactose), whole fruit (fructose, glucose) and vegetables (fructose, sucrose) as there is no report 
of adverse effect (WH O, 2015). According to Van Horn et al. (2010), the Amer ican Heart 
Association (AHA) and SACN (2015) uses the term  “added sugars” to refer to sugars and syrup 
added to foods during processing or preparation, and sugars and syrups added at the table. 
Therefore, based on the definitions used by WH O (2015) and by SACN (2015), free sugars and 
added sugars turn out to be the same terminology. 
101 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
C arbohydrate 
The main components of dietary fibre are derived from the cell walls of plant material in 
the diet and comprise cellulose, hemi cellulose and pectin (the non-starch polysaccharides). 
Lignin, a non-carbohydrate component of the cell wall is also often included. The concept of 
dietary fibre has changed over the years. Fibre was originally described as plant cell wall material 
w hich simply passed through the gut unchanged and provided bulk to faeces. There is currently 
no consensus as to which components of carbohydrates should be included as dietary fibre. 
The Ame rican Association of C ereal C hemists AAC C  (2001) adopted the definition of dietary 
fibre as the edible parts of plants or analogous carbohydrates that are resistant to digestion 
and absorption in the human sm all intestine with comple te or partial ferme ntation in the large 
intestine. 
Dietary fibre has been revised and defined differently by different organizations during 
the last decade. In 2011, AACC continued to adopt the definition of dietary fibre they had been 
defined in 2001. Another  definition of dietary fibre is that fraction of the edible part of plants 
or their extracts, or synthetic analogue that (i) are resistant to the digestion and absorption in 
the small intestine, usually with complete or partial ferm entation in the large intestine; and (ii) 
promot e one or more of the benefit physiological effects which is laxation, reduction in blood 
cholesterol and/or modulation of blood glucose (F SA NZ , 2006). 
In Malaysia, dietary fibre means carbohydrate polyme rs with three or more monomer ic 
units which are not hydrolysed by the endogenous enzym e in the small intestines of human and 
belong to the following categories: 
i) Edible carbohydrate polymers naturally occuring in the food as consume d, 
ii) Carbohydrate polymer, which have been obtained from raw food material by physical, 
enzymatic or chemical means and which have been show n to have physiological effect 
that benefits health as demonstrated by generally accepted scientific evidence to 
com petent authorities, 
iii) Synthetic carbohydrate polyme rs which have been shown to have physiological effect of 
benefit to health as demo nstrated by generally accepted scientific evidence to competent 
authorities. 
It is to be noted that when derived from the plant origin, dietary fibre may include fraction 
of lignin and/or other compounds associated with polysaccharides in the plant cell walls. These 
com pounds also may be measured by certain analytical method(s) for dietary fibre. However, 
such compounds are not included in the definition of dietary fibre if extracted and reintroduced 
into a food. The above definition of dietary fibre is based on that of Code x Alimentarius (2016) 
and steps shall be taken to amend the Malaysian Food Regulations (1985), accordingly. 
102 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Carbohydrate 
4.2 Functions 
Total carbohydrates 
Carbohydrates  are  an  important  source  of  energy  in  human diets comprising some 
40 - 80% of total energy intake (TEI). There are several reasons why it is desirable that 
carbohydrates should provide the main source of energy (FAO/WH O, 19 9 8). In addition to 
providing easily available energy for oxidative metabolism, carbohydrate-containing foods are 
vehicles for important micronutrients and phytochemicals. Dietary carbohydrate is important 
to maintain glycaemic homeostatis and for gastrointestinal integrity and function. 
It is important to note that the nature of dietary carbohydrate is mor e critical on health 
effects rather than the quantity of total energy obtained from carbohydrate intake (Mann et al., 
2007). There is evidence that sugar-sweetened beverages do not induce satiety to the same 
extent as solid forms  of carbohydrate and increasing the consump tion of sugar-sweetened 
beverages induce weight gain. 
Carbohydrate-containing foods such as wholegrains, legume s, vegetables and whole 
fruits are recognized to be able to reduce the risk of diabetes and cardiovascular disease (M ann 
et al., 2007). However, Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition (SACN, 2015) emphasized 
that the effects on health mainly depends on specific components of carbohydrates. For 
example, excess sugar-sweetened beverage is associated with greater risk of developing type- 
2 diabetes mellitus, we ight gain and body mass index. Jakobsen et al., (2010) conducted a 
longitudinal observational study among 5000 Danish subjects over 12 years. It was 
acknowledged that substituting saturated fat with carbohydrates will reduce cardiovascular risk 
only if these carbohydrates have low glycaemic index. This study also concluded that high 
glycaemic index carbohydrates remarkably increase the risk of myocardial infarction. Diet higher 
in glycaemic index or glycaemic load is associated with higher risk of type-2 diabetes mellitus. 
There is no evidence from prospective cohort studies on association between glycaemic index 
and cardiovascular disease or coronary heart disease. However, there is association betwee n 
glycaemic load with greater risk of cardiovascular disease, but only reported in a small number 
of studies (SAC N, 2015). 
Sugars 
Free sugars contribute to the overall energy density of diets, and may promote a positive 
energy balance. Sustaining energy balance is critical to maintaining healthy body weight and 
ensuring optimal nutrient intake (FAO, 2010). There is increasing concern that intake of free 
sugars - particularly in the form of sugar-sweetened beverages - increases overall energy intake 
and may reduce the intake of foods containing more nutritionally adequate calories, leading to 
an unhealthy diet, weight gain and increased risk of NCDs (Hauner et al., 2012, Malik et al., 
2013). Another concern is the association between intake of free sugars and dental caries, 
which has received increasing interest in recent years (Sheiham & Jame s, 2014). 
103 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
C arbohydrate 
D ietary fibre 
Dietary fibre is not categorised as an essential nutrient. Howev er, over the years, it has 
becom e recognised as an important component of a healthy diet and plays important roles in 
health and disease. Evidence from prospective cohort studies have shown that dietary fibre are 
asociated with lower risk of cardio-metabolic diseases and colorectal cancer (SACN, 2015). 
Dietary fibre is also known to be an impor tant mode rator of digestion in the small bowel 
and insufficient intake from the diet can result in inadequate faecal bulk and may affect overall 
health. It is a major substrate for fermentation in the colon, whe re non-starch polysaccharides 
of the plant cell wall are metabolised to short-chain fatty acids. Absorption of the latter provides 
som e energy. In addition, it has been shown that other carbohydrates are present in the diet 
w hich enter the colon and are fermented, including resistant starch and non-digestible 
oligosaccharides. 
Recent evidence indicated that naturally-occurring dietary fibre which can be found in 
wh ole grains, legume s, vegetables and whole fruits have protective effect against cardiovascular 
disease and type-2 diabetes mellitus, although there were som e inconsistencies in study results. 
The EFSA Panel noted that consump tion of diets rich in fibre-containing foods greater than 25g 
per day give health benefits, such as reduced risk of coronary heart disease and type-2 diabetes, 
and weight maintenance  among adults (EFSA, 2010). 
The Dietary Guidelines Advisory C omm ittee (U SD A, 2015a) in their conclusion 
statement s described the dietary patterns associated with beneficial health outcom es. They 
concluded that there is strong evidence for reduce cardiovascular risk with dietary patterns 
characterised by higher consumption of vegetables, fruits, whole grains, regular consumption 
of nuts and legumes and diets that are richer in fibre. There was moder ate evidence for reduce 
risk of overw eight and obesity, type-2 diabetes and cancer in dietary patterns that are higher in 
vegetables, fruits and whole grains. These statem ents about healthy dietary patterns indicate 
the importance of foods that are rich in dietary fibre for prevention of diet-related chronic 
diseases. 
4.3 Metabolism 
G lucose plays the main role in carbohydrate metabolism. Every body cells depends  on 
glucose for its fuel especially the cells of the brain and the rest of the nervous system. The 
breakdown of glucose begins with glycolysis, a pathway that produces pyruvate. Pyruvate may 
be converted to lactate anaerobically or to acetyl CoA aerobically. Once the comm itment to 
acetyl CoA is made, glucose is not retrievable. As carbohydrate is known to be a chief energy 
nutrient, its me tabolism is described by storing glucose as glycogen, using glucose for energy, 
m aking glucose from protein which is called gluconeogene sis, making ketone bodies from fat 
fragment s w hen there is inadequate supply of carbohydrate and in contrary or when 
carbohydrate is abundant, the body will be using glucose to make fat (Rolfes et al., 2009). 
104 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Carbohydrate 
4.4 Sources 
Foo d balance sheet data (FA OS TAT 2013) over the years have shown that the major 
sources of carbohydrates in the human diet are cereals, root crops, sugar crops, pulses, 
vegetables, fruits and milk products. In the Malaysian diet, starch is naturally abundant in grains 
and vegetables such as rice, wheat, maize, barley, cassava, potatoes and sw eet potatoes. Natural 
sugars are found in fruits and juices. Sources of added sugars in diets are carbonated drinks, 
fruit juices/drinks, desserts, cakes, biscuits and candies. Wh olegrains, legumes, vegetables 
and whole fruits are the most appropriate sources of carbohydrates. 
Carbohydrates serve as the main source of energy for many com m unities. However, 
there has been a fall in carbohydrate intake in many countries. In Malaysia, the trend for 
carbohydrate intake after a decade has declined from  220g in 2003 to 195g in 2014 am ong 
adults as reported by Wan Shakira et al. (2015). Wan Nazaimoon et al. (2011) reported that the 
prevalence of obesity in Malaysia kept increasing over the years. Despite the consumption of 
carbohydrate within the recommendation, the increasing prevalence of obesity may be because 
m ost of the carbohydrate food choices are high in sugar. This is supported by latest report 
showing the consumption of sugar/sweetened foods was quite high. From the latest Malaysian 
Adult Nu trition Survey (2014), the  20 to 29 years age group, Bumiputera Sarawak governme nt 
and semi-governme nt staffs have notably higher intake of carbohydrates (median = 200g, 212g, 
203g, respectively) compared with other groups. From the analysis of food balance sheet data 
over the past three decades, the intake of carbohydrates, notably cereals, has declined from  60% 
in the 1960s to 40% in the late 1990s (Tee, 1999). There has also been a clear decline in the 
proportion of energy from carbohydrate from 72% in the 1960s to about 60% in the 1990s. 
Within these national averages, there is considerable variations in between  rural and urban 
population groups.  
Based on food balance sheet data (FAO STAT 2013), per capita supply of sugar (from 
sugar crops comp rising cane and beet sugar, and sugar and sweeteners comp rising raw sugar, 
honey, other sw eeteners) available for consumption in Malaysia increased from 297 kcal/day 
in 2005 to 385 kcal/day in 2009, contributing 10.5 and 13.3 percent, respectively, of total 
available calories for these two periods (Amarra et al., 2016). 
Meanw hile, Malaysian Adults Nutrition Survey 2003 (MAN S), reported that sugar- 
containing foods that contributed most to the energy intakes of Malaysian adults were beverages 
to wh ich sugar is added during preparation such as cordial syrup, tea, coffee, chocolate 
flavoured beverages, condensed milk added to beverages and local kuih (starchy traditional 
cakes). Less than 1.2% of the daily caloric intake was obtained from jam, carbonated drinks, 
and “ABC ice” (shaved ice topped with syrup, nuts and beans) (Amarra et al ., 2016). 
Dietary fibre is present in majority of fruits, vegetables and refined grains (IOM, 2002). 
Nuts, legumes and high fibre grain typically contained more than 3% of dietary fibre. About a 
third of the fibre in legumes, nuts, fruits and vegetables is present as hemicellulose. 
Approximately one-fourth of the fibre in grains and fruits and one-third in nuts and vegetables 
consist of cellulose. Although fruits contain the greatest am ount of pectin, 15-20% of pectin is 
found  in legumes, nuts and vegetables. 
105 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
C arbohydrate 
4.5 D eficiencies and Excesses 
Fats and amino acids (basic componen ts of proteins) are utilized for energy when 
glucose production or availability decreases below that required for the com plete energy 
requirement s of the brain,. However, in order to provide the brain with an alternative fuel, this 
route of energy production results in a rise of ketoacid in the liver. This process is referred to 
as a ketosis. Generally this occurs in a starving person only after glycogen stores in the liver 
are reduced to a low concentration and the contribution of hepatic glycogenolysis is greatly 
reduced or absent. Prolonged deprivation leads to the symptom s and diseases connected with 
severe carbohydrate short fall (Veech, 2004). 
F AO /WHO (199 8) highlighted that the minimal amo unt of carbohydrate in the huma n 
diet that is needed to avoid ketosis is 50g/day in adults. How ever, there is increasing evidence 
in the literature, sugges ting that very-low-carbohydrate ketogen ic diets (usually less than 
50g/day and a relative increase in the proportions of protein and fat) could have a therapeutic 
role in numer ous diseases. The use of very low ketogenic diet in treating epilepsy has been 
w ell-established for many decades and these ketogenic diets are commonly considered to be 
a useful tool for weight control and many studies suggest that they could be more efficient than 
low-fat diets (Dashti et al., 2004). There are new and exciting scenarios about the use of 
ketogenic diets in cancer, type-2 diabetes, polycystic ovary syndrome  (PC OS ), cardiovascular 
and neurological diseases. 
There is no adverse effect of high intakes of unrefined comple x carbohydrate. However, 
overconsum ption of added sugars has been linked to risk of obesity. It is recomme nded that the 
dietary reference value for total carbohydrate intake should be approximately 50% of total 
dietary energy and the average population intake of free sugar should not exceed 5% of total 
dietary energy for age group from two years upwords (SACN, 2005). 
Total carbohydrate intake appears to be neither detrimental nor beneficial to cardio- 
m etabolic health, colorectal health and oral health. However, there are specific components  or 
sources of carbohydrates which are associated with other beneficial or detrimental health 
effects. The hypothesis that diets higher in total carbohydrate cause weight gain is not supported 
by existing evidence (SACN , 2015). However, studies showed  that consump tion of sugar- 
sw eetened beverages, as com pared with non-calorically swee tened beverages among children 
and adolescent results in greater weight gain and increases in body m ass index. Higher 
consum ption of sugars and sugars-containing foods and beverages is associated with a greater 
risk of dental caries while studies indicate that greater consum ption of sugar-sweetened 
beverages is associated with increased risk of type-2 diabetes mellitus (SAC N, 2015). 
There is no association between total starch intake and incidence of coronary events or 
type-2 diabetes mellitus or between  the intake of refined grains and risk of type-2 diabetes 
me llitus. Consumption of brown rice is associated with reduction in risk of type 2 diabetes 
m elllitus, but the evidence is limited. Studies indicate an association between greater 
consumption of wh ite rice and increased risk of type-2 diabetes mellitus in the Asian population, 
specifically in Japan and China (SACN, 2015). 
106 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Carbohydrate 
Dietary fibre can have variable compositions and therefore it is difficult to link a specific 
source of fibre with a particular adverse effect, especially when phytate is also present in the 
natural fibre source. It is concluded that as part of an overall healthy diet, a high intake of dietary 
fibre will not produce deleterious effects in healthy individuals. While occasional adverse 
gastrointestinal sympt om s are observed when consum ing som e isolated or synthetic fibres, 
serious chronic adverse effects have not been observed. Due to the bulky nature of fibres, 
excess consumption is likely to be self- limiting. Therefore, a tolerable upper intake level (UL) 
was not set for individual functional fibres. Strong evidence that increased intake of total dietary 
fibre, and particularly cereal fibre and wholegrain, are associated with lower  risk of cardio- 
me tabolic disease and colo-rectal cancer. Higher intake of oat bran and isolated β-glucans leads 
to lowe r total cholesterol, LDL  cholesterol ang tricyglycerol concentration and lower blood 
preasure (SAC N, 2015). 
4.6 Factors affecting requirements of carbohydrate 
The minimal amount of carbohydrate required, either from endogenous or exogenous 
sources, is determined by the brain’s requirement for glucose (IO M , 2002). The brain is the 
only true carbohydrate-dependent organ in that it oxidises glucose completely to carbon dioxide 
and water. Norm ally the brain uses glucose almost exclusively for its energy needs.  The 
endogenous glucose production rate in a post-absorptive state correlates very well with the 
estimated size of the brain from birth to adult life. However, not all of the glucose produced is 
utilised by the brain. The requirement for carbohydrate has been reported to be 130 g/day in 
adults (IOM, 2002/2005). How ever, the brain can adapt to a carbohydrate-free, energy sufficient 
diet, or to starvation, by utilising ketoacids for part of its fuel requirements . 
Carbohydrate is a key fuel source for exercise, especially during prolonged continuous 
or high-intensity exercise. Carbohydrate requirements are dependent on the fuel needs of the 
athlete’s training and competition program. It is recommende d to take carbohydrate in range 
of 6-10g/kg of body weight depending on sex and physical fitness of the individual, total training 
load, energy expenditure, type of physical activity and environment (Hassapidou, 2011). 
Athletes seem to benefit from 200 to 300 grams of carbohydrates consume d 3-4 hours 
before a sports event. During exercise, athletes should consume 30-60 grams of carbohydrates 
per hour (or 0.7g/kg of body weight) in order to ma intain blood glucose levels. This is very 
important when the event lasts more than an hour and takes place in extreme environmental 
conditions (e.g. cold, heat or high altitude). After exercise, athletes should consum e 1.0-1.5g/kg 
of body weight during the first half hour and again every 2 hour for 4-6 hours in order to replace 
liver and muscle glycogen stores (Hassapidou, 2011). 
The available evidence based on majority of studies on the relationship of dietary fibre 
to gastrointestinal health, several chronic diseases (such as colon cancer, breast cancer), 
glucose tolerance, insulin response as well as weight control and maintenance, indicated that 
the beneficial effects of fibre in humans are most likely related to the amount of food consumed 
but not the individual’s age or body weight (IOM, 2002). 
107 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
C arbohydrate 
4.7 Setting requirements and recommended intakes of carbohydrate 
Total carbohydrates 
Acceptable ranges of intake for each of these energy sources were set based on a 
growing body of evidence that shows  that macronutrients play a role in the risk of chronic 
disease. It is defined as a range of intake for a particular energy source that is associated with 
reduced risk of chronic diseases, such as coronary heart disease (CHD ), obesity, diabetes and/or 
cancer, while providing adequate intakes of essential nutrients. These ranges are also based on 
adequate energy intake and physical activity to maintain energy balance. For example, studies 
have show n a connection betwe en low-fat and high-carbohydrate diets has decreased high 
density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol in the bloodstream, an indicator associated with increased 
risk of CH D. Co nversely, diets too high in fat ma y result in increased energy and saturated fat 
intake, and therefore lead to increased risk of obesity and its complications, such as CHD (IOM 
2006). 
F AO/WHO Scientific Up date (2007) acknowledged the need to re-evaluate the current 
carbohydrate intake range (55-75% of  total energy) as the rationalization for recomme nded 
lower limit is still lacking. The Scientific Update also sugge sted the revision using lower limit 
of 50% total energy was used, similar as recommenda tion from Scientific Advisory Committee 
on Nutrition (2015). This range was based on the rema ining percentages of protein energy (10- 
15%) and fat energy (15-30%). Carbohydrate intake, in particular, was set at 50 to 70%  of total 
energy. A daily minimum intake of 400g of vegetables and fruits, including at least 30g of pulses, 
nuts and seeds, should meet this recommendation. 
The IO M (2002) report indicated that the RDA for carbohydrate is based on the average 
m inimum amount of glucose that would provide the brain with an adequate supply of glucose 
fuel without the requirement for additional glucose production from  ingested protein or 
triacylglycerols, w hich is set at 130g/day for adults and children. The med ian intake of 
carbohydrate has been derived from data from the Co ntinuing Food Survey of Intakes by 
Individuals (CSF II) in 1994-199 6 and 199 8 i.e. 200g to 330 g/day for men and 180g to 230 
g/day for women. This represents 45% to 65% of energy sufficient diet containing an Acceptable 
M acronutrient Distribution Range of carbohydrate intake. Food Standard Australia New Zealand 
(FSA NZ, 2006) has also set the range of carbohydrate to be between 45% to 65% of energy 
(predomi nantly from low energy density and/or low glycaemic index foods). The upper bound 
carbohydrate recomm endations were set so as to accomm odate the essential requirements for 
fat (20%) and protein (15%) and  taking into account that the types of carbohydrates consume d 
are of paramount importance in relation to their health effects. 
The Technical Sub-Co mm ittee (TSC) on Energy and Macronutrients considered these 
various recomm endations including revising the previous RNI Malaysia (2005) carbohydrate 
recomm endation of  55-70% TEI and adopting the term free sugars from W HO (2015).  It was 
felt that the appropriate proportion of energy from carbohydrate should be 5% lower from the 
previous RNI Malaysia (2005) due to reduction of free sugars recomm endation from 15% to 
10%  of total carbohydrate. The TSC recomme nded that in the revised RNI, carbohydrate should 
com prise 50-65% TEI. This decision also takes into consideration the proportion of energy 
contributed by protein and fat, described in chapters 2 and 3 of this monograph. 
108 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Carbohydrate 
Sugars 
The population nutrient intake goals of WH O  (2003) for the prevention of diet-related 
chronic diseases has recommended that not mor e than 10% of total energy should be from free 
sugars. WHO (2015) and Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition (2015) also recom m ended 
a further reduction of free sugars to 5% as there is no harm to further limit free sugars intake. 
The DRI  committee of IOM  (2002) has recommended an upper limit of 25% of total energy for 
sugar intake. 
Based on  food balance sheet data for Malaysia, the available sugars in the country was 
estimated to be about 86 g/day or 13% of total energy in 1985. This was found to have increased 
to 104 g/day or 14%  of total energy in 2002 (FAO, 1985; 2002). Based on Food Balance Sheets, 
it was showed that the amount of available sugar and sweeteners (kg per capita per year) has 
increased almost 70% (from 28.8kg to 48.7kg) between year 1967 to 2007 and Malaysia ranks 
second (48.7kg per capita per year) only to United States (67.6kg per capita per year) as 
countries with most sugar and sw eeteners availability (Khor, 2012). Study conducted by Nik 
Shanita et al. (2012) concluded that mean intake of added sugar of adults in Klang Valley was 
approximately 9 teaspoons or 45.5±28.8 g/day. In addition, latest Malaysian Adults Nutrition 
Su rvey in 2014 deduced that sugar (white, brown and Melaka) is one of the top five foods 
consume d daily (55.9%), especially by adults from urban areas. The survey also concluded 
that the consum ption of sugar and sugar-based foods contributed to at least 4 food items in a 
day ( ≈ 6.5 times/ day). 
How ever, a review by Am arra et al., (2016) showed that there is insufficient evidence to 
allow an estimation of intake levels of added sugar among different age groups in Malaysia, and 
to identify major sources of added sugar. National level data obtained from MA NS  in 2003 is 
outdated. While, data from MAN S (2014) only indicated the list of commonly eaten foods and 
drinks containing sugar consumed  by Malaysian adults (Table 4.1) but not the estimation of total 
sugar intake, hence another national assessment of sugar intake is needed. 
109 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
C arbohydrate 
Food items (%) 
Local kuih 79.9 
Tea 70.4 
Malted drink 59.1 
Condensed milk 51.3 
Carbonated drinks 45.7 
Cake 38.5 
Kaya 35.3 
Cor dial syrup 34.4 
Ready-to-drink beverage 30.8 
Pre-mixed drink 28.8 
Ice blended 25.8 
Jelly/ custard 18.4 
Yoghur t drinks 14.0 
Energy drinks 12.6 
Source: Institute for Public Health (2014) 
Table 4.1 Some commonly eaten foods and drinks containing sugar consumed by Malaysians 
A high level of free sugars intake is of concern because of its association w ith poor 
dietary quality, obesity and risk of NCDs  (WHO, 2014). Ho we ver, WHO (2015) in their Guidelines 
Su gars Intake For Adults and Children, agreed that excess weight gain and dental caries should 
be the key outcom es of concern in relation to free sugars intake. Risk of developing type 2 
diabetes and CVD is often mediated through the effects of overweight and obesity, among other 
risk factors. Therefore, measures aimed at reducing overweight and obesity are likely to also 
reduce the risk of developing type 2 diabetes and CVD, and the complications associated with 
those diseases (WHO, 2015). 
Fructose or fruit sugar is a simple monosaccharide found in ma ny plants and honey. It 
can be found in its monosaccharide form or can be bound to glucose with a disaccharide bond 
in sucrose. Fru ctose is one of the three dietary mo nosaccharides, along with glucose and 
galactose. The primary dietary sources of fructose are high-fructose corn syrup and sucrose 
(cane or beet sugar) because both are commonly used to sw eeten beverages and processed 
foods. Fructose is sugar that is naturally present in fruits and vege tables (Mintz, 1985) 
Tappy & Lê (2015) in their review of health effect of fructose and FC CS, concluded that 
a high-fructose diet can increase blood triglyceride, alter hepatic glucose output and increase 
uric acid concentratrations. Whether these effects are associated with increase risk of metabolic 
or cardiovascular disease independently of an increase in body fat mass remains debatable. 
Tappy & Lê (2015) also highlighted that epidemiological prospective studies show a strong 
association between fructose-containing caloric sweeteners (FCCS) in take and body weight 
110 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Carbohydrate 
gain. Furthermore, FCCS consumpt ion is also associated with the incidence of dyslipidemia, 
insulin resistance, and type-2 diabetes, incidence or risk factors for cardiovascular diseases, 
cardiovascular mortality, chronic kidney diseases, hyperuricemia and gout. In human studies, 
fructose is associated with increasing hepatic fat, inflammation, and possibly fibrosis (Vos & 
Lavine, 2013).  
High fructose intake has been suggested to be a key factor that induces non-alcoholic 
fatty liver disease (NAF LD), but the evidence from large epidemi ologic studies is lacking. 
How ever, the results of a cross-sectional study am ong older Finnish adults showed that high 
intake of fructose is not associated with a higher prevalence of NAF LD as assessed by using the 
Fatty Liver Index and NAFLD liver fat score (Kanerva et al., 2014). 
In both adults and children, WHO  (2015) strongly recomme nded reducing the intake of 
free sugars to less than 10% of total energy intake. These recommendations were based on the 
totality of evidence reviewed regarding the relationship between free sugars intake with body 
we ight and dental caries. WHO suggested a conditional recommendation for a further reduction 
of the intake of free sugars to below 5% of total energy intake. How ever, based on limited studies 
involving relatively small samples, the intake of added sugar of Malaysian adults and children 
appears to exceed 10% of total calories. This exceeds the 2015 sugar intake recommenda tion 
by WHO , which indeed is advocating for a further reduction in the intake of free sugars to below 
5% of total energy intake (Amarra et al., 2016). 
The TSC  on Energy and Macronutrients considered the recomme ndations of W HO  and 
IOM   and the local dietary pattern and recomm ends that intake of free sugar should be less 
than 10% of total energy intake. This is felt to be a realistic figure and appropriate advice for 
the local population based on limited data on sugar intake of the population. 
G lycaemi c response, glycaemic index and glycaemic load 
Carbohydrate-containing foods have a wide range of effects on blood glucose 
concentration during the course of digestion (glycaemic response). A significant body of data 
suggests that more slowly absorbed starchy foods that are less processed, may have health 
advantages over those that are rapidly digested and absorbed (IOM, 2006). 
Glycaem ic index (GI) has been proposed as a method to classify foods based on their 
blood glucose-raising potential. It is defined as the incremental area under the blood glucose 
response curve of a 50g of carbohydrate portion of a test food expressed as a percentage of the 
response to the same amount of carbohydrate from  a standard or reference food (white bread 
or glucose) taken by the same subject (FAO/WHO, 1998). 
Atkinson et al., (2008) have compiled the average GI of 62 common foods derived from 
multiple studies. Soy beans have the lowest value of GI (16±1) and rice crackers/ crisp has the 
highest value (87±2). The GI of the standard food is expressed as 100. According to 
International Standard ISO 26642:2010 (2010), GI can be sorted into three groups: a GI value 
below 55 is defined as low, 56 to 69 as moderate and 70 and above as high. The Consultation 
report also explained how GI can also be applied to mixed meals or whole diets by calculating 
the weighted GI value of the meal or diet. 
111 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
C arbohydrate 
The concept of glycaemic load (G L) stresses the fact that the am ount of carbohydrate in 
a food is important in determ ining fasting triglyceride and the post-prandial plasma glucose 
response  (Table 2). The GL, the product of the food carbohydrate content by its GI, divided by 
100 (GL= GI /100 x carbohydrate content) is a measure that incorporates both the amount and 
quality of dietary carbohydrate. According to Ve nn & Green (2007), GL value can be classified 
as low ( ≤10), moderate (10-19) and high ( ≥20). The GL of a specific food serves as a basis to 
evaluate the total GL of the diet. H ence, a food with very high GI but with only a small amount 
of carbohydrate w ill have a small GL. Dietary GI and GL  have relatively predictable effects on 
circulating glucose, hem oglobin A1c, insulin, triacylglycerol, high density lipoprotein (HDL) 
cholesterol, and urinary C-peptide concentrations. As such, it is theoretically plausible to expect 
a low G I diet to reduce risk of type-2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. However, the sufficient 
evidence needed to recommend substantial dietary changes based on GI is not available (IO M, 
2006). 
Table 4.2 Food factors influencing glycaemic responses 
• Amou nt of carbohydrate 
• Nature of monosaccharide components 
G lucose 
Fructose 
G alactose 
• Nature of starch 
Amylose 
Amylopectin 
Starch-nutrient interaction 
Resistant starch 
• C ooking/ food processing 
Degree of starch gelatinization 
Particle size 
Food form 
C ellular structure 
• Other food components 
Fat and protein 
Dietary fibre 
Antinutrients 
O rganic acids 
Source: FAO/WHO  (1998) 
112 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Carbohydrate 
In Malaysia, research into glycaemic response of foods is still at its infancy. However, 
interest in the subject has been increasing. Som e data on GI values of frequently consumed 
Malaysian foods are given in Appendix 4.1. 
There are a number of longer-term implications of altering the rate of absorption, or GI, 
of dietary carbohydrate (FAO/WH O, 1998). Reducing diet GI, for example, has been shown to 
improve overall blood glucose control in subjects with diabetes and reduce serum triglycerides 
in subjects w ith hypertriglyceridemia. There is some evidence that the GI is relevant for sports 
nutrition and appetite regulation. 
Used in conjunction with information about food compos ition, GI has thus been proposed 
to guide consumers in food choices. The practical application of GI has howev er been the 
subject of m uch controversy. Its practical use worldwide has also been limited to a few 
countries. The practical use of GI of single food items has been particularly doubtful because 
glycaemic responses to foods are influenced by many factors including its carbohydrate content 
and the other food com ponents present and even cooking or food processing m ethods 
(FAO /WH O, 1998) (Table 4.2). Some low GI foods may not alw ays be a good choice because 
they are high in fat. Conversely, some high GI foods may be a good choice because of 
convenience or because they have low energy and high nutrient content. It is not necessary or 
desirable to exclude or avoid all high GI foods.  
The TSC on Energy and Macronutrients, therefore, has no definite recomme ndations on 
the use of GI or GL at this time. It, however, recommends research and practitioner groups in 
the country to continue to monitor global developments on the matter and to actively research 
the subject. Therefore, the FAO/WHO Scie ntific Update (2006) recom m ended caution regarding 
the use of GI as only basis in choosing carbohydrate-containing foods. 
D ietary fibre 
There is no biochem ical assay that reflects the dietary fibre status of an individual. Clearly, 
one cannot mea sure blood fibre concentration since, by definition, fibre is not absorbed. Hence, 
the DRI  C omm ittee of IOM  (2002) had reviewed the po tential health benefits of fibre 
consumption, which may be compromised by lack of fibre in the diet. These include a number 
of epidemiological studies conducted to evaluate the relationship between fibre intake and risk 
of chronic diseases. The Committee recommend ed an adequate intake ranging from 19-25g/day 
of total fibre for young children whereas intakes for adolescents range from 26-38g/day, the 
lower figures being for girls. Adult intakes are recommended to be 25g/day for women  and 
38g/day for men. Intakes for adults more than 51 years are 20% lower whilst for pregnant and 
lactating women, 12% higher. 
The Amer ican Dietetic Association (ADA, 2002) has recommen ded intakes that are 
sligh tly lower  than those of IOM, i.e. 20-35g dietary fibre/day or 10-13g per 1,000 kcal for 
adults. Although recognising the lack of clinical data, the ADA recom mends that for children 
older than 2 years, the dietary fibre intake should be equal to or greater than their age plus 
5 g/day. 
113 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
C arbohydrate 
The nutrient intake goals recomm ended by WHO (2 003) for the prevention of diet-related 
chronic diseases has indicated a total dietary fibre intake of >25g per day whereas  non-starch 
polysaccharides (NSP) intake is recommend ed to be >20g per day. The report further 
recomm ends that whole grain cereals, fruits and vegetables are the preferred sources of NSP .  
U pon review ing all available information, the TSC for Energy and Macronutrients decided 
to  m aintain the RNI  (2005) recom mendation of 20-30 g of dietary fibre per day for all age 
groups. This is largely based on the range recomm ended by AD A (2002) 20-35g and WHO 
(2003) >25g per day. Greater efforts have to be made to encourage Malaysians to consume  a 
w ide variety of plant foods in order to meet the recomm endations. 
D iscussion on revised RNI for Mal aysia 
The recomme nded intake of total carbohydrate, sugars and dietary fibre for Malaysia are 
com pared with that of the Malaysian RNI (2005), WHO (2015) and SAC N (2015) in Appendix 
4.1 
The revised recommendations for total carbohydrate and free sugars are lower by 5% 
com pared to the Malaysian RNI  (2005). This is justifiable as new evidence has surfaced that a 
high level of sugar intake is associated with poor dietary quality, obesity and risk of NCDs. 
Recomm endation for dietary fibre remains the same  as the Malaysian RNI (2005). 
4.8 Research recommendations 
The following priority areas of research are recommend ed: 
• Im proved methodologies for the m easurement of carbohydrates and their components 
in foods. 
• Im proved national food composition table with data on types of carbohydrates (starch, 
total and individual sugars). 
• Studies related to glycaemic response (including glycaemic index and glycaemic load) 
of carbohydrate-containing food based on local foods. 
• Data on the content of dietary fibre in local foods should be obtained for inclusion in the 
national food composition database. 
• System atic reviews and met a-analyses relating free sugars intake to blood lipid levels, 
blood pressure and diabetes-related outcomes  (i.e. glucose, insulin, metabolic syndrom e, 
prediabetes and insulin resistance). 
• Evaluation of different behavioural-change approaches to promote the reduction of free 
sugars intake; in particular, the intake of sugar-sweetened beverages, which is identified 
as a behavioural risk factor contributing to calorie over-consumption, especially among 
children. 
114 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Carbohydrate 
4.9 References 
AAC C (2011). The Definition of Dietary Fibre. Report of the Dietary Fibre Definition Committee. 
Amer ican Association of Cereal Chem ists. 
AAC C (2001). The Definition of Dietary Fibre. Report of the Dietary Fibre Definition Committee. 
Amer ican Association of Cereal Chem ists. 39 p. 
AD A (2002). Position of the Am erican Dietetic Association: Health implications of dietary fibre. 
J Am Diet Assoc. 102:993 
Ama rra MS V, Khor GL & C han P . (2016). Intake of added sugar in Malaysia: A review . Asia 
Pacific J Clin Nutr 25(2): 227-240. 
Atkinson F, Foster-Powell, K. & Brand-Miller JC (2008). International Tables of Glycemic Index 
and Glyc em ic Load Values_ : 20 08. Diabetes C are, 31(12), 2281-2283. 
http://doi.org/10.2337/dc08-1239.J.B.M. 
Barakatun Nisak MY, Ruzita AT, & Norimah AK. (2005). Glycaemic Index of Eight Types of 
Comm ercial Rice in Malaysia. Mal J Nu tr 11(2), 151-163. 
Barakatun Nisak MY, Ruzita AT, Norimah AK, Nor Azmi K, & Fatimah A. (2009). Glycaemic index 
of four commercially available breads in Malaysia. Internat J Fd Sc Nutr 60(6), 487-96. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/09637480701804268 
Brand-Miller JB, Foster-Powell K & Colagiuri S (1996). The G.I. Factor: The Glycaemic Index 
Solution. Rydelmere: Hodder & Stoughton. pp 20-37 ; pp 70-79. 
Cumm ings JH & Stephen AM (2007). Carbohydrate terminology and classification. Eur J Clin 
Nu tr, 61 Suppl 1, 5-18. http://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ejcn.1602936 
Codex Alimentarius (2016). Guidelines for Nutrition Labeling. FAO, WHO, 2016. 
Dashti HM, Mathew TC, Hussein T, et.al. (2004).  Long -term effects of a ketogenic diet in obese 
patients. Exp Clin Cardiol. Fall; 9(3): 200 - 205 
EF SA (2010). Scientific Opinion on Dietary Reference Values for carbohydrates and dietary 
fibre. EFSA Journal, 8(3), 1-77. http://doi.org/10.2903/j.efsa.2010.1462. 
FA O/WHO (1998 ). Carbohydrate in Human Nutrition. Rep ort of a Joint Expert FAO /WH O 
Cons ultation. FAO F ood and Nutriton Paper 66. Food and Agriculture Organization, Ro me. 
140 p. 
FAO /WH O  (2004). Proposals for a definition and methods of analysis for dietary fibre content. 
CX/N F SD U 04/3 Add 1. Codex C ommit tee on Nutrition and Foods  for Spec ial Dietary 
Uses. Codex Alimentarius Commissi on. 
115 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
C arbohydrate 
FA O /WH O  (2007). Scientific Update on carbohydrates in human nutrition: Conclusions Eur J 
Clin Nutr 61 (Suppl 1), S132-S137; doi:10.1038/sj.ejcn.1602943 
F AO (1985; 2002). Food Balance She et (various years). FAOSTAT database: 
w ww .apps.fao.org./faostat/ Food & Agriculture Organization, Rome. 
F AO, FAOS TAT website. [cited 2013/10/10]; Available from:  http://faostat3.fao.org/faostat- 
gateway/go/to/download/E/EE/E. 
H assapidou M (2011).  Carbohydrate requiremen ts of elite athletes. Br J Sports Me d 2011;45:e2 
doi:10.1136/bjsm.2010.081570.23 
H auner H, Bechthold A, Boeing H, Brönstrup A, Buyken A, Leschik-Bonnet E, Linseisen J, 
Schulze M, Strohm D & Wol fram G  (2012). Evidence-Based Guide line of the G erman 
Nutrition Society: Carbohydrate Intake and Prevention of Nutrition-Related Diseases. 
Ann Nutr Metab 60(suppl 1):1-58 DOI: 10.1159/000335326 
IOM  (2002;2005). Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrate, Fibre, Fat, Fatty Acids, 
Cholesterol, Protein and Amino Acids. Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine. 
National Academy Press, Washington DC . Chapters 6 and 7. 
IO M (2005). D ietary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrate, Fiber, Fat, Fatty Acids, 
Cholesterol, Protein, and Amino Acids (M acronutrients) (Dietary Reference Intakes 
Series) Hardcover - International Edition, October 28, 2005 
Instiute for Public Health. 2015. Malaysian Adults Nutrition Survey 2014. IKU: Kuala Lumpur. 
Institute for Public Health (IPH ). (2014). National Health and Morbidity Survey 2014: Malaysia 
Adult Nu trition Survey (MANS ): Vol. III: Food consumption statistics of Malaysia (Vol. 3). 
ISO  (2016). Food products - Determination of the glycaemic index (GI) and recommenda tion 
for food classification 26642:2010. 
Jakobsen MU, Dethlefsen C, Joensen AM, Stegger J, Tjønneland A, Schmidt EB & Ov ervad K. 
(2010). Intake of carbohydrates compared with intake of saturated fatty acids and risk 
of myoc ardial infarction: importance of the glycemic index. Am J Clin N utr , 91(6), 1764- 
8. http://doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.2009.29099 
Kanerva N, Sandboge S, Kaartinen NE, Ma¨nnisto¨ S & Eriksson JG (2014). Higher fructose 
intake is inversely associated with risk of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in older Finnish 
adults. Am J Clin Nutr doi: 10.3945/ajcn.114.086074 
Khor GL (2012). Food availability and the rising obesity prevalence in Malaysia. IeJSM E, 6 (supp 
1), S61-S68. 
Lee SY  (2005). Penentuan indeks glisemik bagi tiga jenis pau sege ra I pasaran tempa tan. Tesis 
Sarjanamuda Pemakanan. UKM. 
116 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Carbohydrate 
Lee MC  (2005). Penentuan indeks glisem ik untuk nasi dan kari ayam dari tiga jenis beras 
kom ersial di pasaran Malaysia. Tesis Sarjanamuda Pemak anan. UKM. 
Malik VS, Pan A, Willett WC & Frank B Hu FB. (2013). Sugar-sw eetened beverages and weight 
gain in children and adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am  J Clin Nutr 
2013;98:1084-102. 
Mann J, Cumm ings JH, Englyst HN, Key T, Liu S, Riccardi G, Wisema n M. (2007). FAO/WHO 
scientific update on carbohydrates in human nutrition: conclusions. Eur J Clin Nutr, 61 
Suppl 1, S132-S137. http://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ejcn.1602943 
MAN S (2003). A report of Malaysian Adults Nutrition Survey. Ministry of Health: Putrajaya. 
MAN S (2014). A report of Malaysian Adults Nutrition Survey. Ministry of Health: Putrajaya. 
Mintz SW  (198 5). Swee tness and powe r. The place of sugar in modern history. New  York: 
Penguin. ISBN  978-0-14-009233-2 
National Health and Medi cal Research Council, Ministry of Health Australia, 2005. Nutrient 
Reference Values for Australia and New Zealand. 
NC CFN  (1999). Ma laysian Dietary Guidelines. National Coo rdinating Committee  on Food and 
Nutrition, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
Nik Shanita S. (2004). Developm ent and determination of glycaemic index and types of 
carbohydrate in endurance athletes’ food choices. Final Report U KM N14/2000 grant. 
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
Nik Shanita S, Norimah AK, & Abu Hanifah S. (2012). Development and validation of a food 
freque ncy questionnaire (FFQ) for assessing sugar consumption among adults in Klang 
Valley, Malaysia. Mal J Nutr, 18(3), 283-293. 
Nor Muaiza AM (2005). Pe nentuan indeks glisemik roti aneka sapuan. Tesis Sarjanam uda 
Pema kanan. UKM. 
Robert SD, Aziz AI, W inn T, & Wo lever TMS (2008). Glycemi c index of common  Malaysian 
fruits. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr 17(1), 35-39. 
Rolfes SR , Pinna K & Wh itney E. 2009. Un derstanding normal and clinical nutrition. Wad sw orth, 
Cenga ge Learning: Belmont. 
Scientific Advisory Com mittee on Nutrition. (2015). Carbohydrates and He alth. TSO The 
Stationary Office, (August), 1-6. 
Sheiham A & James WPT (2014). A reappraisal of the quantitative relationship between sugar 
intake and dental caries: the need for new criteria for developing goals for sugar intake. 
BMC  Public Health201414:863. DOI : 10.1186/1471-2458-14-863 
117 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
C arbohydrate 
Tappy L &  Lê KA (2015). Health Effects of Fructose and Fructose-Con taining Caloric 
Swe eteners: Where Do W e Stand 10 Years After the Initial Whistle Blowings? Physiol Rev 
90:23-46, 2010; doi:10.1152/physrev.00019.2009 
Tee ES (1999). Nutrition of Malaysians: where are we heading? Mal J Nutr 5(1&2):87-109. 
U SDA (2015a). Scientific Report of the 2015 Dietary Gu idelines Advisory Committee. 
Department  of Agriculture and Department of Human Health Services USA, 2015. 
U SDA (2015b). Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2015-2020, 8th Edition. Departm ent of 
Agriculture and Department of Human Health Services USA, 2015. 
Van H orn L, Johnson RK, Flickinger BD , Vafiadis DK, Yin-Piazza S (2010). on behalf of the 
Added Sugars Conference Planning Gro up. Translation and implem entation of added 
sugars consum ption recommendations: a conference report from the Ame rican He art 
Association A dded S ugars Conference 2010. Circulation. 122:2470-90. doi: 10. 
1161/CI R.0b013e3181ffdcb0. 
Veech RL (2004). The therapeutic implications of ketone bodies: the effects of ketone bodies 
in pathological conditions: ketosis, ketoge nic diet, redox states, insulin resistance and 
mitochondrial metabolism. Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids, 70(3): 
309-319. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.plefa.2003.09.007 
Venn BJ, & Green TJ (2007). Glycem ic index and glycemic load: measureme nt issues and their 
effect on diet-disease relationships. Eur J Clin Nutr, 61 Su ppl 1, S122-S131. 
http://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ejcn.1602942 
Vos  MB & Lavine JE (2013). Dietary Fructose in Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease. He patology; 
57:2525-2531 
W an Nazaimoon WM, Kamarul Im ran M, Amir Sharifuddin MK, Aziz AI, Ikram Shah I, Khalid AK, 
Wan  M ohamad WB . (2011). Prevalence of overweight and obesity amo ng adult 
M alaysians: An update. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr, 20(1), 35-41. 
W an Shakira RH, Hasnan A, Ahama d A, Nur Liana AM , & Shubash, S. (2015). Change in nutrient 
intake after a decade: Co mp aring Malaysian Adult Nutritional Survey, 2003 and 2014. 
Me d J Mal, Vol 70 (Suppl.1) 
W H O (1990). Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases: report of a WHO Stud y 
G roup. WH O  Technical Report Series 797. Geneva: World Health Organization (accessed 
27 February 2014). 
W H O (2003). Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases: report of a Joint WHO 
Technical R eport S eries, No. 916.  Geneva:  Worl d Healt h O rganization 
(http://whqlibdoc.who.int/trs/WHO _TRS _916.pdf, accessed 27 February 2014). 
118 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Carbohydrate 
WH O  (2009). Global health risks: mortality and burden of disease attributable to selected ma jor 
risks. Geneva : World Health Organization. http: //www. wh o.int /healthinfo 
/global_burden_disease/ Global Health Risks_report_full.pdf, accessed 27 Feb ruary 
2014). 
WH O  (2015). Information note about intake of sugars recommended in the W HO guideline for 
adults and children. 
119 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
C arbohydrate 
Appen dix 4.1 Comparison of recom mended intake of carbohydrate and its component: RN I 
M alaysia (2017), RNI Malaysia (2005), WHO (2015) and SACN (2015) 
Food items M alaysia 
(2017) 
M alaysia 
(2005) 
WHO 
(2015) 
SAC N 
(2015) 
% of total 
energy % of total energy intake 
intake 
Total carbohydrate 50 - 65 55 - 70 55 - 75 50 
Sugars < 10 # < 15 < 10 # < 5 *
Dietary fibre 20 -30 g 20 -30 g 25 g 15 - 30 g 
# Free sugars; *Added sugars 
Appendix 4.2: Glycaemic index value of selected Malaysian foods 
Food/ Drink GI GI Indicator 
F ried meehoon* 99 High 
F ragrant rice* 97 
Rice (beras kilang) + 90 
Noodle rice (kueh-teow) + 85 
Wholem eal bread* 85 
White bread* 83 
Pineapple* 82 
F ragrant rice* 80 
Pau kari ayam* 80 
Teh tarik * 78 
Sw eet potato  + 77 
F ried macaroni* 74 
Sardine sandwich* 73 
Roti canai & dhal* 71 
Nasi lemak* 66 Mode rate 
Herba ponni rice* 65 
White bread with margarine & sugar spread* 64 
Brown rice* 60 
120 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Carbohydrate 
*glucose was used as the reference food; + White bread was used as the reference food 
(Source: Nik Shanita, 2004;  Lee MC, 2005; Lee SY, 2005; Nor Muaiza, 2005; Barakatun Nisak et al., 2005; 
Robert et al., 2008; Barakatun Nisak et al., 2009) GI Indicator: Brand-Miller JB, Foster-Powell K & Colagiuri S 
(1996) 
Food/ Drink G I G I Indicator 
Fried rice* 59 
Papaya* 58 
Doug hnut* 57 
Multi-grains breads* 56 
Pau biji lotus 55 Low 
White bread with pineapple jam* 55 
Banana (pisang berangan) + 55 
Waterm elon* 55 
Cur rypuff* 54 
White bread with peanut butter spread* 54 
Pau kacang merah* 51 
Durian* 49 
Appendix 4.3 : Types of food sources with fibre content per 100 grams 
Food Dietary Fibre per 100 grams (g) 
High fibre bran (ready-to-eat cereal) 29.3-47.5 
French beans (cooked) 9.4 
Chick peas (canned) 6.4 
Lentils (cooked) 7.9 
Mung beans (cooked) 7.6 
Black beans 8.7 
Kidney beans, cooked 6.4 
Pear, raw 3.1 
Pump kin seeds, roasted 18.4 
Baked beans, canned, plain 6.0 
Soybean 6.0 
Avocado 6.7 
Apple with skin 2.4 
121 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
C arbohydrate 
Food D ietary Fibre per 100 grams (g) 
Gr een peas, cooked 4.1-5.5 
Prune (stewed) 3.1 
Sw eet potato, baked with skin 3.3 
F igs (dried) 9.8 
Potato (baked with skin) 2.1 
Almonds 12.5 
Whole w heat spaghetti, cooked 4.5 
Sunflower seeds kernel, dry roasted 11.1 
Or ange 2.2 
Banana 2.6 
Guava 5.4 
Pearly barley, cooked 3.6 
Winter squash (pumpkin), cooked 2.8 
Dates 8.0 
Pistachios, dry roasted 9.5 
Peanuts, oil roasted 9.4 
Whole w heat parata bread 9.5 
Source: USDA, 2015b 
122 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Summ ary 
Vitamins Recommendations 
The Technical Sub-Committee (TSC) on Vitamins reviewed all the eight vitamins in RNI 2005 and 
agreed that they should be retained in the updated RNI , recognising their continued relevance. Several 
other vitamins were considered for addition to the list and four were agreed to be of importance to be 
included in the updated RNI, namely Vitamin K, Cobalamin, Pyridoxine and Panthothenic Acid. These 
are felt to be relevant and important for the Malaysian population. A total of 12 vitamins are therefore 
included in Malaysian RNI (2017). 
The vitamins were assigned to members of the TSC to prepare write-ups. For the eight vitamins 
in RN I (2005), the writers reviewed the original write-up and determ ined if changes to the write-up are 
required or if new inform ation need to be added. For the four additional vitam ins, members were 
assigned to prepare new write-ups. For the preparation of these write-ups the TSC referred to several 
recent publications published after 2005 by reputable national and regional research organisations 
that generate primary data on recommended nutrient intakes. These include publications of the Institute 
of Medicine (IOM) and the European Food Safety Authority (EF SA). FAO/WHO did not have a revised 
RN I in recent years, but the TSC decided that the RNI (2004) of W HO/FA O remained as another main 
source of reference since it was prepared by an international group of experts appointed by these 
United Nations agencies. 
M ember s of the TSC had agreed on the common approach towards deciding on the values to be 
adopted as Malaysian RNI (2017). For each vitamin, the rationale and the value recomme nded intake 
in the new references were considered. These were compared with the RNI 2005 values, which were 
adapted from WHO/FAO ( 2004). If the references provided m ore recent and better approaches to 
establishing recommended intake, especially those based on biomarkers, their recom mended values 
we re considered. The appropriateness of the recommended values in relation to the local situation 
were also considered in deciding if a recom men ded value needed to be ame nded. There was also 
agreeme nt to have a uniform format for the write up for each of the vitamins, including the sub- 
headings, the depth and length of the write up. 
In the final version of RNI (2017), for all the 8 vitam ins in the RNI (2005), except for vitamin D, 
the TSC decided to retain the original values, ie adapting the values from WH O/FAO  (2004). For vitamin 
D, the Comm ittee decided to adapt the values from IOM (2011) in view of several recent reports on 
the unsatisfactory status of this vitamin among some  population groups. These new values on vitamin 
D are generally 2-3 times higher than the 2005 values. For the three of the four new vitamins, the TSC 
felt that the W HO /FAO (2004) values recommended  for vitamin K, pyridoxine and pantothenic acid are 
appropriate to be adapted for use in RNI (2017). For vitamin B12, the TSC adapted the EFSA (2015) 
values derived mainly based on appropriate biomarkers. These values are higher for all age groups 
compa red with the WHO/FA O (2004) and IOM (1998 ) values which were based on dietary intake levels. 
123 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
5 Thiamin (Vitamin B1) 
5.1 Introduction 
Thiamine or thiamin, also know n as vitamin B1 or aneurin, is a colourless comp ound with 
the chemical formula C12H17N4OS. About 80% of the approximately 25-30 mg of thiamin in 
the adult human body is in the form  of thiamin diphosphate (TDP; also, know n as thiamin 
pyrophosphate-TPP), the main metabolically active form of thiamin. It is soluble in water and 
insoluble in alcohol. Thiamin decomposes if heated. Thiamin was first discovered by Umetaro 
Suzuki in Japan in 1910 when researching how rice bran cured patients of beri-beri. It was the 
first nutrient deficiency studied in Malaya in the beginning of the 20th century. 
5.2 Functions 
Thiam in functions as the co-enzyme thiamin pyrophos phate (TPP) in the metabolism of 
carbohydrates and branched-chain amino acids. TPP , coordinated through magnesium (Mg++), 
participates in two main types of metabolic reactions: (a) the formation of ( α− ketols (e.g. among 
hexose and pentose phosphates) as catalysed by transketolase; and (b) in the oxidation of ( α− 
keto acids (eg pyruvate, ( αketoglutarate and branched-chain ( αketo acids) by dehydrogenase 
complexes. Hen ce, thiamin deficiency will result in overall decrease in carbohydrate metabolism 
and its inter-connection with amino acid metabolism (via α− keto acids). Severe consequence s 
can arise such as a decrease in the formation of acetylcholine for neural function. Thiamin is 
also essential for normal growth and development and helps to maintain proper functioning of 
the heart and the nervous and digestive system s. Thiamin cannot be stored in the body; 
how ever, once absorbed, the vitamin is concentrated in muscle tissue. 
5.3 M etabolism 
Thiamin is released by the action of pho sphatase and pyropho sphatase in the upper 
sm all intestine. At low co ncentrations, the process is carrier-mediated, and, at higher 
concentrations, absorption occurs via passive diffusion. Active transport is greatest in the 
jejunum and ileum (it is inhibited by alcohol consumption and by folic deficiency). Decline in 
thiamin absorption occurs at intakes above 5 mg/day. The cells of the intestinal mucos a have 
thiam in pyrophosphokinase activity, but it is unclear as to whether the enzym e is linked to active 
absorption. The majority of thiamin present in the intestine is in the pyrophosphorylated form 
thiamin diphosphate (TDP), but when thiamin arrives on the serosal side of the intestine it is 
often in the free form. The uptake of thiamin by the mucos al cell is likely coupled in some way 
to its phosphorylation/dephosphorylation. On the serosal side of the intestine, evidence has 
show n that discharge of the vitamin by those cells is dependent on Na+ dependent ATPase. 
124 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Thiam in (Vitamin B1) 
Uptake of thiamin by cells of the blood and other tissues occurs via active transport and 
passive diffusion. The brain requires a much greater amount of thiamin than in other cells of 
the body. Much of ingested thiamin never reaches the brain because of passive diffusion and 
the blood brain barrier. About 80% of intracellular thiamin is phosphorylated and most is bound 
to proteins. In some tissues, thiamin uptake and secretion appears to be mediated by a soluble 
thiamin transporter that is dependent on Na+ and a transcellular proton gradient. Thiamin and 
its acid metabolites (2-methyl-4-amino-5-pyrimidine carboxylic acid, 4-methyl-thiazole-5-acetic 
acid, and thiamin acetic acid) are excreted principally in the urine. 
5.4 Sources 
Thiamin is found in a wide variety of foods of plant and animal origin. How ever, only a 
few foods, including yeast, lean pork and legumes can be considered as good sources of the 
vitamin (Tee et al., 1997). Yeast contains an extraordinary amount of the vitamin; a com m ercial 
yeast extract has a content of up to 0.6 mg/100 g. Pork and pork products example lean pork, 
ham and sausage contain high concentrations of thiam in of close to 0.9 mg/100 g. Other meat 
products such as beef, chicken and duck have much lower amounts of the vitamin, generally 
about 0.1 mg/100 g. A com m ercial brand of beef extract has an exceptionally high level of 
thiamin (1.6 mg/100 g), but this is usually taken in small amounts. Fish and shell fish contain 
even less thiamin.  Various types of legumes, example chickpea, dhal, green gram and red gram 
and soya bean contain thiamin ranging from 0.45mg to 1.7 mg/100 g bean (Table 5.1). 
There are also several processed products in the market, especially bread, cereal 
products and biscuits, that are fortified or enriched with thiamin and several other B vitamins 
and can become  impo rtant sources of the vitamin. Fruits are poor sources of thiamin, containing 
in general not more than 0.03 mg/100 g. Vegetables contain slightly m ore thiamin but are 
generally less than 0.1 mg/100 g and are therefore not good sources as well. 
Table 5.1: Thiamin (Vitamin B1) content of foods 
Food m g/100 g 
Cereals and cereal products and tubers 
Whea t germ 1.86 
Cer eals RTE  (commercial brand)* 1.33 
Cer eals RTE rice (commercial brand)* 1.25 
Whea tflour, wholemeal 0.75 
Oat, rolled 0.46 
Bread, white 0.42 
Bread. Wholemeal 0.40 
Maize 0.22 
125 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Thiamin (Vitamin B1 ) 
Food m g/100 g 
Fish, poultry and meat 
Beef extract 1.60 
Pork, lean 0.85 
Bacon 0.84 
Anchovy, dried 0.17 
C hicken, matured, dressed carcass 0.15 
Beef, lean 0.10 
Legumes, nuts and seeds 
Sunflower seeds 1.48 
Dhal, Australian (yellow) 1.40 
Peanuts 1.00 
Soya beans, white 0.87 
M ung beans 0.72 
Lotus seeds 0.72 
C ashew nuts 0.67 
C hickpeas 0.45 
M ilk and milk products 
M ilk, filled 0.72 
M ilk, powder, infant formula 0.74 
M ilk, powder, instant, full cream 0.70 
Others 
Yeast, dried, brewers 0.75 
Yeast extract 0.60 
Source: Tee et al., 1997; USDA  Food Com position Database, 2016* 
5.5 D eficiencies 
Thiamin deficiency results in the disease called beri-beri, which has been classically 
considered to exist in dry (paralytic) and wet (oedem atous) forms. Beri-beri occurs in human- 
m ilk-fed infants whose nursing mothers are deficient in the vitamin. It also occurs in adults 
w ith high carbohydrate intakes mainly from milled rice and intakes of foods containing anti- 
thiamin factors. 
126 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Thiam in (Vitamin B1) 
The clinical signs of deficiency include anorexia; we ight loss; mental changes such as 
apathy, decrease in short-term memory , confusion and irritability; m uscle weakness; and 
cardiovascular effects such as an enlarged heart. In wet beri-beri, oedema  occurs while in dry 
beri-beri, muscle wasting is obvious. In infants, cardiac failure may occur rather suddenly. In 
relatively industrialised nations, the neurologic reflections of Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrom e are 
frequently associated with chronic alcoholism with limited food consumption. 
Clinically manifest thiamin deficiency is rare today, although som e segm ents of the 
populations could be on marginal or sub-marginal intakes of the vitamin. Sym ptoms are less 
promine nt in sub-clinical deficiencies and may include tiredness, headache and reduced 
productivity. 
In M alaysia, in the early part of the 20th century, beri-beri was found to be prevalent 
am ongst migrant workers working in camp s, consumin g primarily a polished rice diet. The 
Institute for Medical Research (IMR) embarked on a series of intensive studies into the cause 
of the disease, beginning 1900. It was also the first nutrient deficiency studied in the country. 
Various hypotheses on the etiology of the disease were proposed and actively investigated. 
Although the IMR researchers were not the first to discover that thiamin deficiency was the 
cause of the disease, they contributed significantly to the prevention and cure of the disease. 
Their efforts in distributing methods for the preparation of extracts of rice polishings to hospitals 
and dispensaries for the treatment of beri-beri patients and the prohibition of the use of white 
polished rice helped to control the disease (Tee et al., 2002). 
The mo st widely used biomarkers for estimating thiam in status by m easuring the 
transketolase activity in erythrocytes which require TDP as a coenzym e. The TDP  effects of 
>25% are defined as deficiency and effects between 15% and 25% as marginal deficiency 
(Bem eur and Butterworth, 2014). Recently, the Nutrition Societies of Germ any, Austria and 
Sw itzerland (D-A-CH) (Strohm et al., 2016) derived the reference values for thiamin intake 
based on studies investigating the transketolase  activity in erythrocytes and also the excretion 
of thiamin in the urine. A fall in TDP levels in erythrocytes below 120 nmol/l indicates deficiency 
(Sauberlich, 1999; Finglas, 1993), while excretion levels between 27 µg and 65 µg are defined 
as marginal deficiency and of 27 µg as deficiency (Finglas, 1993).  
Since the 1950s, there have been no further reports of clinically manifest vitamin B1 
deficiency in the country. Very few reports of subclinical thiamin deficiency in any age group 
have been documented. Indeed, very few biochemical studies on the status of thiam in have 
been undertaken, due to lack of laboratory facilities for the required analyses. A major study of 
the nutritional status of various comm unities in poverty villages in Peninsular Malaysia included 
the determination of urinary excretion of thiamin in 1170 subjects. The prevalence of “low ” 
excretors varied with different age groups, with most groups having a prevalence of about 25%, 
indicating the need to improve vitamin B1 intake in these groups (Chong et al., 1984).  
In Malaysia, thiam in deficiency seems to have been practically eliminated over the years, 
although it cannot be ruled out that certain segments of the commu nity could have marginal and 
sub-marginal deficiencies of the vitamin. For example, in 2004 a possible outbreak of beri-beri 
was detected in a drug detention and rehabilitation centre in Perlis. It was reported that 74% of 
the sam ple studied (n=154 inmates) had thiamin deficiency due to poor dietary intake and 
coupled with possible intake of certain thiamin antagonists in their diet (Fo zi et al., 2006). 
127 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Thiamin (Vitamin B1 ) 
Another beri-beri outbreak occurred in the LG Detention C amp in Negeri Sembilan in 2014. A 
total of 1.9% (n=19) had bilateral leg oedem a with symptoms  of paraesthesia (52.6%), fatigue 
(36.8% ), difficulty breathing (36.8%), poor appetite (21.1%), and abdom inal pain (33.3%). The 
only risk factor identified was alcohol intake (Noor Aizam et al., 2015). 
5.6 Factors affecting thiamin requirements 
There are no studies that have examined the effect of energy intake on thiamin 
requireme nt. There is also no agreement as to whether expressing thiamin requirem ents in 
absolute terms is more useful for predicting biochemic al thiamin status than expressing it in 
relation to energy intake. Despite the lack of direct experime ntal data, the known biochemical 
function of thiamin as thiamin pyrophosphate (TPP) in the metabolism of carbohydrate suggests 
that at least a small (10%) adjustment to the estimated requirement to reflect differences in the 
average energy utilisation and size of men and wome n, a 10% increase in the requirement to 
cover increased energy utilisation during pregnancy, and a small increase to cover the energy 
cost of milk production during lactation appears to be necessary (IOM, 1998). 
He avy exercise under certain conditions may increase the requireme nt for thiamin as 
w ell as other vitamins. However, the observations on the effects of physical activity on thiamin 
requireme nt have been inconsistent, the effects are minor and the expe rime ntal conditions 
highly variable. It was thus concluded that under norma l conditions, physical activity does not 
appear to influence thiamin requirements to a substantial degree. However, those who are 
engaged  in physically dem anding occupations or who spend much time  training for active 
sports may require additional thiamin (IOM, 1998). 
There are no studies that directly compare the thiam in requirements of m ales and 
females. A small (10%) difference in the average thiamin requireme nts of men and women is 
assum ed on the basis of mean differences in body size and energy utilization. 
5.7 Setting requirements and recommended intake of thiamin 
There are no known local studies on thiamin requirements of comm unities that the 
Technical Sub-Com mittee (TSC) on Vitamins could use as a reference when considering RNI for 
this vitamin. The two main references used by the TSC when establishing thiamin requirement 
in the previous RNI (NCC FN, 2005) we re WHO/FA O (2004) consultation report and the IOM 
(1998) DRI recommendat ions. The rationale and steps taken in setting requirements  and the 
levels recom m ended by these organisations as well as available reports of thiamin status of 
com muni ties in the country were considered in setting thiamin requirement for RNI Malaysia 
2005. There have been no updated recomm endations by WHO/ FAO (2 004), IOM or other 
international scientific organisations. There are also very few recent reports of the biochemical 
status of the vitamin amongst the local population groups. Therefore, in this revision of RNI 
(2017) for Malaysia, the TSC on Vitamins decided to retain the WHO/F AO (2004) values. These 
recomm endations, which remain the same as in RNI (2005), are given in bold in the following 
paragraphs according to age groups and summarised in Appendix 5.1. 
128 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Thiam in (Vitamin B1) 
Infants 
The recom mended intake for young infants is based on observed mea n intake data from 
infants fed human  milk exclusively during their first 6 m onths as well as the thiamin 
concentration of milk produced by well-nourished mothers. The FAO /WH O Con sultation 
estimated that the mean thiamin content of human milk is 0.21 mg/l which corresponds to 0.16 
mg  thiamin per 0.75 L of secreted milk per day. The Consultation rounded the figure and set the 
requirem ent at 0.2 mg/day for infants 0-6 months (WHO /FAO, 2004). 
For the group 6-11 months, in addition to thiamin from breast milk, the intake of solid 
food has also to be taken into account. Thus the average requireme nt was calculated to be 0.3 
mg/day. 
RN I for infants 
0 - 5 months 0.2 mg/day 
6 - 11 months 0.3 mg/day 
Children 1 - 9 years 
There appears to be no direct data on which to base the estimated average requirement 
for children 1-9 years. The RDA for these age groups have thus been determined by IO M  (1998) 
by extrapolating downwards from the average requirement of young adults by adjusting for 
metabolic body size and growth and adding a factor for variability. The RDA  for thiamin is set 
by assuming a coefficient of variation (CV) of 10% because information is not available on the 
standard deviation of the requirement for thiamin. As RDA is defined as equal to the estimated 
average requirement (EAR) plus twice the CV to cover the needs of 97 to 98% of the individuals 
in the group, therefore, the RDA is 120 % of the EAR. 
The WH O/FAO  (2004) consultation did not provide details on how the recommended 
intakes were arrived at, but they were similar to those of the IOM ( 1998). 
RN I for children 
1 - 3 years        0.5 mg/day 
4 - 6 years        0.6 mg/day 
7 - 9 years        0.9 mg/day 
129 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Thiamin (Vitamin B1 ) 
Adolescents 
The IO M  Dietary Reference Intakes (DRI) Standing Committee reviewed several studies 
am ongst adolescents in attempting to obtain data to estimate the requirements  of thiamin for 
this age group (IOM , 1998). These included dietary intake studies, status of thiamin, and a 
controlled-diet dose-response experiment. In the absence of additional definitive information, 
requirem ents for these groups were extrapolated from  adult values as described above for 
young children. 
Similar to what has been outlined for the recommend ed intake for children, the FAO/W HO 
Co nsultation did not provide details on how the recommende d intakes for adolescents were 
arrived at, but they were similar to those of the IOM ( 1998). 
RNI for adolescents 
Boys 10 - 18 years 1.2 mg/day 
G irls 10 - 18 years 1.1 mg/day 
Adults and elderly 
The same recomm endations were made for the intakes of adults by the WHO/F AO (2004) 
C onsultation as w ell as the IOM (1998).  No details for the recomme ndations were given by the 
form er group.  The IOM publication referred to several studies that were reviewed, especially a 
study by Sauberlich et al. (1979 ), who reported a carefully controlled, thiamin depletion- 
repletion experiment amo ngst 7 healthy young men. These investigators concluded that thiamin 
at 0.30 mg/1,000 kcal (approximately 1.0 mg per day) met the minimum requirement for young 
m en as determ ined by using urinary excretion of thiamin. This value is also close to the average 
requirement  for normal erythrocyte transketolase activity. The requireme nt for men was thus 
set at 1.0 mg/day and 0.9 mg/day for women, assuming a 10% decrease for women based on 
body size and energy needs. 
The RDA for thiamin was thus set by assuming a coefficient of variation (CV)  of 10% 
because information is not available on the standard deviation of the requirement  for thiamin. 
RDA is thus defined as equal to the estimated average requirement (EAR) plus twice the CV to 
cover the needs of 97 to 98 of the individuals in the group, or 120% of the EAR. 
In considering the requirements of the elderly, although there are some  data to suggest 
that requirem ents might be some wh at higher in the elderly than in younger adults, the IOM DRI 
Standing Commi ttee recognised that there is also a concomitant decreased energy utilisation 
that may offset this (IOM, 1998). Thus the recommende d intake for older adults is the same as 
those for adults. 
130 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Thiam in (Vitamin B1) 
RN I for adults 
Men 19 - 65 years 1.2 mg/day 
Women 19 - 65 years 1.1 mg/day 
RN I for elderly 
Men > 65 years 1.2 mg/day 
Women > 65 years 1.1 mg/day 
Pregnancy and lactation 
The WH O /FAO  (2004) Consultation accepted an estimated average total energy cost of 
230 MJ for pregnancy.  With an intake of 0.4 mg thiamin/4184 kJ, this amounts to a total of 22 
mg, or 0.12 mg/day for additional thiamin need for the second and third trime sters (180 days). 
Taking into account an increased growth in maternal and foetal comp artments, an overall 
additional requirement of 0.3 mg/day was felt to be adequate. 
Lactating wom en are estimated to transfer 0.2 mg thiamin in their m ilk each day, and an 
additional 0.2 mg is estimated as a need for the increased energy cost of lactation of about 
2092 kJ/day.  A total amount of 0.4 mg/day was thus added to the recomme nded intake for the 
adult women. 
RN I for  
Pregnancy 1.4 mg/day 
Lactation 1.5 mg/day 
Discussions on revised RNI for Malaysia 
The RNI values for thiamin for Malaysia, adapted from WHO/F AO (2004), are also the 
same as those adopted by the Working Group for the Harmonization of RDA s in SEA region. (Tee 
& Florentino, 2005).  Appendix 5.1 provides a summary of RNI, compared with the previous 
Malaysian RNI of 2005, the WHO/F AO  (2004) recommendations and the values recommende d 
by IOM (1998). 
The revised RNI is actually similar to that of IOM (1998) but with slight differences in the 
groupings of children and adolescents of both sexes.  The TSC discussed the need to increase 
the thiamin requirem ent for older adults, but decided to maintain the RNI  to be the same as that 
for adults because of the generally more sedentary lifestyle and therefore lowe r energy 
expenditure of the elderly.  
131 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Thiamin (Vitamin B1 ) 
5.8 Tolerable upper intake levels 
There does not appear to be a problem with thiamin toxicity because renal clearance of 
levels usually ingested is rapid. There have been no reports of adverse effects from the 
consum ption of excess thiamin by ingestion of food and supplements . Neither the WHO/FAO 
(2004) nor the IOM (1998) reports provided any indications of toxicity levels.  Because the data 
are inadequate for a quantitative risk assessment, no Tolerable Uppe r Intake Level (UL) could 
be derived for thiamin (IOM, 1998). 
5.9 Research recommendations 
The following priority areas of research are recommend ed: 
• Magnitude of thiamin deficiency among high risk groups such as alcoholic individuals, 
elderly people and psychiatric patients. 
• Efficacy of thiamin supplementation on high risk individuals or groups. 
• Determ ine effects of food preparation and cooking m ethods on thiamin content of 
selected foods to enable establishing conversion factors for calculating thiamin losses 
for a wide variety of foods 
• Study nutrient values (including vitamin B content) of the various types of rice available 
in the market and their claims of health benefits for various chronic diseases. 
132 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Thiam in (Vitamin B1) 
5.10 References 
Bemeur  C , Butterworth RF (2014). Thiamin. In: Ross AC, Caballero B,  Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, 
Ziegler TR (eds) Modern  Nutrition in Health and Disease, 11th Ed., Lippincott Williams 
& W ilkins, Philadelphia, p 317-324. 
Chong Y H, Tee ES, Ng TKW , Kandiah M, R Hanis Hussein, Teo PH and Siti Mizura S (1984). 
Status of Comm unity Nutrition of Poverty Kampungs. Institute for Me dical Re search 
Bulletin No. 22, Kuala Lumpur; 65 p. 
Finglas PM (1993). Thiamin. Int J Vit Nutr Res 63:270-274. 
Fozi K, Azmi H, Kam ariah H  Noor Azwa MS (2006).  Prevalence of thiamine deficiency at a drug 
rehabilitation centre in Malaysia. Med J Mal 61 (5): 519-525. 
IO M (1998). Thiamin. In: Dietary References Intakes for Thiamine, Riboflavin, N iacin, Vitam in 
B6, Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin and Choline. F ood and Nutrition Board, 
Institute of Medicine. National Academy Press, Washington DC; chapter 4, pp 58-86. 
NC C FN  (2005). Recommended Nutrient Intakes for Malaysia. National Coordinating Comm ittee 
on Food and Nutrition Ministry of Health, Putrajaya. 
Noor Aizam MS, Hazlina Y, Mohd Paid Y and Bina Rai S (2015). Factors associated with beri- 
beri outbreak am ong inma tes in LG detention camp, Neg ri Sembilan, M alaysia, 2014, 
Me d J Mal 70(1): Abstract. 
Sauberlich HE, Herman YF, Stevens CO, Herman RH (1979). Thiamin requireme nt of the adult 
hum an. Am  J Clin Nutr 32: 219-222. 
Sauberlich HE (199 9). Laboratory Tests for the Assessment of Nutritional Status. 2nd Edition, 
CR C Press, Boca Raton. 
Strohm  D, Bechtold A, Isik N, Leschik-Bonnet E, Heseker H, German Nutrition Society (2016). 
Revised reference values for the intake of thiamin (vitamin B1), riboflavin (vitamin B2), 
and niacin. NFS Journal 3:20-24. 
Tee ES, Moh d Ismail N, Mohd Nasir A and Khatijah I (1997). Nu trient Compo sition of Malaysian 
Foo ds. 4th Edition. Ma laysian Foo d Comp osition Database Programm e, Institute for 
Medical Research, Kuala Lumpur; 310 p. 
Tee ES, Ng  TKW & Foo LC  (2002). Division of Human Nutrition. In: 100 Years of the IMR 
(Institute for Medical Research 1900-2000). ed. Tee ES, Lopez JB, Ng KH, Chooi LKP , 
Radin Shamilah RH, Tan THD, Gi ll HK , Balraj P , Khor SC. In Comm em oration of the 
Cen tenary Celebrations of the Institute for M edical Res earch, Kuala Lumpur; pp 165- 
183. 
Tee ES and Florentino RF (2005). Recommended Dietary  Allowances: Harmonization in 
Southeast Asia. ILS I, SEA Region Monograph Series, Singapore. 
133 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Thiamin (Vitamin B1 ) 
US  Departm ent of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Nutrient Data Laboratory. (2015). 
U SDA National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference, Release 28. Version Current: 
Septemb er 2015, slightly revised May 2016.  Internet:  /nea/bhnrc/ndl. 
W HO/ FAO (2004). Thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, vitamin B6, pantothen ic acid and biotin. In: 
H uman Vitamin and Mineral Requirements. Second Edition. Report of a Joint FA O/WHO 
Expert Consultation. FAO, Rome; pp 164-168. 
134 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Thiam in (Vitamin B1) 
M alaysia (2017 )* W HO/FAO (2004) IOM  (1998) 
Age group RNI (m g/day) Age group RNI (m g/day) Age group AI (m g/day) 
Appendix 5.1: C om parison of recom m ended intake for Thiam in (Vitam in B1): RNI M alaysia (2017 ), RNI of FAO/W HO (2004) and RD A of IOM  1998) 
Infants Infants Infants 
0 - 5 m onths 0.2 0 - 6 m onths 0.2 0 - 6 m onths 0.2 
6 - 11 m onths 0.3 7 - 12 m onths 0.3 7 - 12 m onths 0.3 
RD A (m g/day) 
C hildren C hildren C hildren 
1 - 3 years 0.5 1 - 3 years 0.5 1 - 3 years 0.5 
4 - 6 years 0.6 4 - 6 years 0.6 4 - 8 years 0.6 
7 - 9  years 0.9 7 - 9  years 0.9 
Boys Boys Boys 
10 - 18 years 1.2 10 - 18 years 1.2 9  - 13 years 0.9 
14 - 18 years 1.2 
G irls G irls G irls 
10 - 18 years 1.1 10 - 18 years 1.1 9  - 13 years 0.9 
14 - 18 years 1.0 
M en M en M en 
19  - 65 years 1.2 19  - 65 years 1.2 19  - 30 years 1.2 
> 65 years 1.2 > 65 years 1.2 31 - 50 years 1.2 
51 - 70 years 1.2 
> 70 years 1.2 
135 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Thiamin (Vitamin B1 ) 
M alaysia (2017 )* W HO/FAO (2004) IOM  (1998) 
Age group RNI (m g/day) Age group RNI (m g/day) Age group AI (m g/day) 
W om en W om en W om en 
19  - 65 years 1.1 19  - 65 years 1.1 19  - 30 years 1.1 
> 65 years 1.1 > 65 years 1.1 31 - 50 years 1.1 
51 - 70 years 1.1 
> 70 years 1.1 
Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy 
1.4 1.4 14 - 18 years 1.4 
19  - 30 years 1.4 
31 - 50 years 1.4 
Lactation Lactation Lactation 
1.5 1.5 14 - 18 years 1.4 
19  - 30 years 1.4 
31 - 50 years 1.4 
*Recom m endations sam e as RNI (2005) 
136 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
6 • Riboflavin (Vitamin B2) 
6.1 Introduction 
Riboflavin (vitam in B2) is 7,8 dimethyl-10- isoalloxazine, a free vitamin which is a weak base 
normally isolated and synthesised as a yellowish orange amorphous solid. It is a precursor of 
essential coenzyme s such as flavin mononucleotide (FMN) and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD). 
Through these two flavoco-enzyme s, riboflavin functions as a catalyst for redox reactions in 
num erous metabolic pathways and in energy production. 
Riboflavin is also important for the synthesis, conversion and recycling of niacin, folate and 
vitam in B6 and for the synthesis of all heme proteins, including hemoglobin, nitric oxide oxidases, 
P450 enzymes and proteins involved in electron transfer and oxygen and storage (Rivlin, 2007). 
Riboflavin derivatives also have direct antioxidant properties and increase endogenous antioxidant 
status essential cofactors in glutathione redox cycle (Ashoori and Saedisome olia, 2014). 
6.2 Functions 
The main function of riboflavin is to help the body to convert carbohydrate to energy. 
Riboflavin is important for the metabolism of carbohydrate, amino acids and lipids. It carries out 
these functions as coenzymes  flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) an d flavin adenine 
m ononucleotide (FMN).  These two coenzymes play major roles in energy production, cellular 
function, growth and development and metabolism  of fat. Due to its fundam ental roles in 
m etabolism, riboflavin deficiencies are first evident in tissues such as skin and epithelia. 
Riboflavin also acts as an antioxidant due to its ability to activate antioxidant enzym es. 
Antioxidants fight free radicals and reduce DNA  damage.  Riboflavin also has a role in helping the 
body to convert vitamin B6 to folate to a form that it can be used in the body. 
6.3 M etabolism 
Riboflavin in the diet is ingested as food protein. Riboflavin is converted to its coenzyme 
form s by ATP-dependent phosphorylation to yield riboflavin-5’phosphate or FMN. Most FMN is 
then converted to FAD by FAD pyrophosphorylase. In the stomach, gastric acid cleaves most of 
the coenzym es (FAD and FMN) from the protein. This is then hydrolysed to riboflavin by 
pyrophosphatase and phosphatase in the upper intestine. The primary absorption of riboflavin is 
via rapid, active and saturable transport system. The rate of absorption is proportional to intake. 
Riboflavin is transported in the blood as free riboflavin and FM N. Although sma ll amounts of 
riboflavin can be found in the liver and kidney, it is not stored in any useful amo unt and must 
therefore be supplied in the diet regularly. Most excess riboflavin is excreted in the urine. 
6.4 Sources 
Riboflavin is widely distributed in foodstuffs and all plants and animal cells. Good sources 
include dairy products especially milk, leafy vegetables, legumes, kidneys and mushrooms . The 
food sources of riboflavin are similar to those of other B vitamins. Therefore, it is not surprising 
that if an individual’s diet has inadequate amounts of riboflavin, it will very likely be inadequate 
137 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Riboflavin (Vitamin B2) Riboflavin (Vitamin B2) 
in other B vitamins as well. Som e data from the nutrient compo sition of Malaysian foods are 
extracted to indicate the riboflavin content of various local foods (Tee et al., 1997).  
Various types of legumes, including chick peas, lentils, red and black gram and soya bean 
contain fairly high levels of riboflavin, around 0.2-0.5 mg/100 g.  Various meat products have 
moder ate amounts of the vitamin. Pork (0.3 mg/100g) may have slightly higher amounts, whilst 
other meats for example beef, mutton, chicken and duck contain about 0.2 mg per 100 g. Fishes, 
w ith 0.1 mg/100 g have lower amounts of riboflavin. Hen eggs are a good source of the vitamin, 
w ith about 0.6 mg /100 g, with slightly more being concentrated in the egg yolk. A food with 
exceptionally high riboflavin is beef extract (6.9 mg/100 g), but small amounts of this food is 
generally consumed. 
Fruits and vegetables are poor sources of riboflavin. Recent data on riboflavin content of 
selected comm ercial rice such as fragrant rice, basmathi rice and siam rice showed that all 
varieties contain 0.06m g riboflavin per 100g (Mo hd Fairulnizal et al., 2015). There are several 
processed products in the market, especially bread, cereal products and biscuits, malted drinks 
that are fortified or enriched with riboflavin and several other B vitam ins, thus can become 
important sources of these vitamins. To ensure a riboflavin-rich diet, milk and dairy products as 
w ell as whole grain products should be consumed daily. Meat in moderation and fish contribute 
to an adequate supply (Strohm et al., 2016). Examples of food sources of riboflavin (Tee et al., 
1997) are shown in Table 6.1. 
Table 6.1 Riboflavin (Vitamin B2) content of foods 
Food m g/100g 
Legumes and nuts 
Lentils 0.52 
Gr een gram 0.45 
Soya bean, white 0.34 
Red gram 0.34 
Black gram 0.20 
C hick pea 0.20 
Almond 0.52 
Peanut 0.43 
M eat and organ meats 
C hicken liver 1.28 
Ox liver 0.58 
Pork 0.30 
M utton 0.28 
Duck 0.25 
C hicken 0.22 
Beef, lean 0.21 
138 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Riboflavin (Vitamin B2 ) 
Food m g/100g 
Milk 
Milk powder 1.40 
Milk, UH T 0.40 
Cheese, processed 0.40 
Milk, UH T, flavoured 0.33 
Yoghur t 0.25 
Vegetables 
Sw amp cabbage (kangkung) 0.55 
Mushr oom, grey oyster 0.46 
Mustard leaf (sawi) 0.27 
Spinach (bayam) 0.25 
Chinese cabbage (pak choy) 0.25 
French bean 0.21 
Long bean 0.13 
Egg, hen whole 0.58 
Egg yolk 0.37 
Egg white 0.27 
6.5 D eficiencies 
The clinical features of huma n riboflavin deficiency do not have the specificity that ma y 
characterise deficits of some other vitamins, such as ascorbic acid. De ficiency of riboflavin  may 
m anifest itself as weakness, oral pain, tenderness or burning and itching of the eyes, dermatitis 
and anaemia (Rivlin,2007), cracks and sores at the corners of the mouth, inflammation of the 
mo uth and tongue, and skin lesions. Cellular functions of B vitamins including B2 are closely 
inter-related. Thus vitamin B2 deficiency almost invariably occurs in comb ination with a deficiency 
of other B-complex vitamins. A growing body of research has evaluated the effects of 
multivitamins and minerals on brain function. Hence deficiency of riboflavin has also been 
associated w ith brain specific sym ptoms such as fatigue, personality change and brain 
dysfunction (Rivlin, 2007).   
The major cause of hypo-riboflavinosis is inadequate dietary intake. Even though riboflavin 
deficiency levels are under researched, biochemical deficiency is potentially widespread due to the 
high prevalence of inherited restricted riboflavin absorption/utilization that affects 10-15% of the 
world population (Sinigaglia-Coimbra, Lopes and Coimbra, 2011). In recent years, a factor that 
continues to be associated with the deficiency levels of riboflavin is the paradoxical malnutrition 
associated with obesity. Incidentally in Malaysia, the prevalence of adult overweight and obesity 
has increased to 30% overweight and 17.7% obesity in the most recent National Health Morbidity 
Survey (NHMS ) (IPH, 2015). This deficiency phen omenon is predicated on the basis that 
Source: Tee et al., 1997 
139 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Riboflavin (Vitamin B2) 
obesogenic diets are typically biased towards energy rich processed foods that are high in fats 
and simp le sugars but low in micronutrients (Kimmons et al., 2006). The recent Malaysian adults 
nutrition survey (MANS) also reported that majority of Malaysian adults consume d more than 
30% of their diet contributed from fat (IPH, 2014)  
Riboflavin supply can be determined by measuring the glutathione reductase activity in the 
erythrocytes, for which FAD is needed as a coenzym e. The activity coefficient is calculated from 
the ration of enzyme activity with and without FAD addition. Activity coefficients of >1.4 indicate 
a riboflavin deficiency, while activity coefficients between 1.2 - 1.4 indicate ma rginal deficiency. 
Another option to determine riboflavin supply is the measurem ent of urinary excretion of 
riboflavin, which reflects the short term supply and correlates with riboflavin intake in people w ith 
body nitrogen equilibrium. 24-hour urinary excretion of riboflavin levels of riboflavin between 40 
ug and 119 ug are defined as a marginal deficiency, w ith levels <40 ug being defined as a 
deficiency (Strohm et al., 2016). 
There are not many data reporting on riboflavin deficiencies in Malaysia. The few studies 
reported were am ong the elderly. Suzana et al. (1999) carried out a study among 350 elderly in 
the rural villages of the East Co ast of Malaysia. 77% of the elderly studied were riboflavin deficient, 
assessed by erythrocyte gluthathione reductase activity coefficient. In another study among 820 
elderly in four rural areas in Peninsular Malaysia, Suzana et al. (2007) reported that the most 
likely nutrients to be deficient amon g these elderly were thiam in, riboflavin and calcium, evaluated 
by dietary history. How ever in this study, almost half of the elderly were under reporting their 
energy intake. Thus there should be caution when interpreting the results. 
In Cam bodia, Whi tfield et al. (2015) reported suboptimal riboflavin status among women of 
childbearing age, measured by erythrocyte gluthathione reductase activity coefficient. The 
prevalence of suboptimal and deficient riboflavin status was 89% among the urban women while 
92%  among the rural women. 
6.6 Factors affecting riboflavin requirements 
There are no reported studies that exam ined the effect of energy intake on riboflavin 
requirement . The biochemical function of riboflavin in the metabolism of carbohydrate suggests 
that at least a small (10%) adjustment to the estimated requirement to reflect differences in the 
average energy utilisation and size of men and women (IO M, 19 98 ). A 10% increase in the 
requirem ent is also suggested to cover increased energy utilisation during pregnancy, and a sm all 
increase to cover the inefficiencies of milk production is needed. Despite energy expenditure is 
decreased with aging, a study by Boisvert et al. (1993) supported the use of the same requireme nt 
for the elderly as for younger adults. 
Riboflavin status measurements is affected by physical activity. Exercise produces stress in 
the metabolic pathways that use riboflavin (Manore, 2000). Thus the requirement of riboflavin for 
individuals who are physically active and who exercise or who are athletes  should be higher due 
to this physiological demands (American Dietetic Association et al., 2009). Some studies have 
demonst rated a moderate rise in the erythrocyte glutathione activity coefficient (EGRAC) as well 
as a decrease in urinary riboflavin excretion with an increase in physical activity. However, there 
is no available data on which to quantify the adjustment that should be made. 
140 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Riboflavin (Vitamin B2 ) 
6.7 Setting requirements and recommended intakes of riboflavin 
Riboflavin is an existing vitamin in M alaysia RNI 2005. In that recomm endation, the TSC 
had referred to the WHO/FAO (2004) consultation report and IOM (1998) DRI recommenda tions 
as the main references. The rationale and steps taken in setting the requireme nts and the levels 
recom me nded by these organisations as well as available reports of riboflavin status of 
com munities in the country were considered when setting the recomme ndations in RNI  2005. The 
WH O /FAO  (2004) recommendations were adopted as riboflavin requirement  for RNI 2005. 
In setting the requirement for this revised RNI , the Technical Sub-C ommittee  (TSC) referred 
to any known local studies on riboflavin that could be used as a reference. There are very few 
reports of the biochemical status of the vitamin amongst the population groups. To date, there is 
only one study (Suzana et al., 199 9 ) which reported the biochemical status among the elderly and 
another study w hich showed dietary riboflavin intake among the elderly (Suzana et al., 2007). In 
term s of international literature, there have been no recent updates from W HO/F AO or IOM or 
other international organisations on riboflavin requirement. Recognising this, the TSC on Vitamins 
decided to continue to adopt the WHO /FAO  (2004) values as the revised RNI (2017) for Malaysia. 
These recom me ndations, which are similar to RNI 2005, are outlined below, according to age 
groups and summarised in Appendix 6.1  
Infants 
In determining riboflavin requirement, the IOM (1998) report took the sam e approach as 
that used for estimating intake of thiamin. As there was no sufficient data that reliably reflected 
response to dietary riboflavin intake in infants, adequate intake was estimated. This was estimated 
based on the mean riboflavin intake of infants fed principally with human milk. 
On the basis of several available studies, a riboflavin concentration of 0.35 mg/l was used 
for human milk consum ed by infants younger than 6 months. Using the mean value of 750 ml/day 
for intake of human milk, the estimated adequate intake was 0.3 mg/day, after rounding up. By 
extrapolation from adequate intake for younger infants, the intake for riboflavin for older infants 
was estimated to be 0.4 mg/day after rounding up. 
The Ger ma n, Austria and Switzerland Nutrition Societies also derived the reference value 
(RV) for riboflavin for infants 0-5 months , based on the content of the three vitamins (B1, B2 and 
B3) in breast milk which is considered to be optimal diet for infants (Butte et al., 2002). The RV 
is therefore an estimated value. For infant 6-11 months, The RV is based on average requirement 
for adults (Strohm et al., 2016). 
RN I for infants 
0 - 5 months 0.3 mg/day 
6 - 11 months 0.4 mg/day 
141 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Riboflavin (Vitamin B2) 
Children and adolescents 
As there was a lack of data concerning the riboflavin requireme nts of children or adolescents, 
the requireme nt for these age groups have thus been determine d by IOM (199 8) by extrapolating 
downw ards from the average requireme nt of young adults by using a metabolic body w eight ratio 
multiplied by a growth factor. The RDA for riboflavin was next set by assuming a coefficient of 
variation (C V) of 10% because information is not available on the standard deviation of the 
requirement for riboflavin. As RDA is defined as equal to the estimated average requirem ent (EAR) 
plus twice the CV to cover the needs of 97 to 98% of the individuals in the group, therefore, the 
recomm ended intake is 120 % of the EAR. 
Fo r children and adolescents, the Ge rman, Austria and Switzerland Nutrition Societies derived 
the reference values for riboflavin intake based on the average requireme nt for adults and are 
calculated considering the age based guiding values for energy intake as well as assuming a 
coefficient of variation of 10% (Strohm et al., 2016). 
RNI for children    
1 - 3 years        0.5 mg/day  
4 - 6 years        0.6 mg/day  
7 - 9 years        0.9 mg/day 
RNI for adolescents 
Boys 10 - 18 years 1.3 mg/day 
Girls 10 - 18 years 1.0 mg/day 
Adults and elderly 
The IOM  DRI Comm ittee established estimated requireme nts based on findings from several 
studies of riboflavin requirements of adults that addressed clinical deficiency signs and 
biochemical values including erythrocyte glutathione reductase activity coefficient (EGR AC) in 
relation to measured dietary intake of riboflavin (IOM, 1998). The reviewed data showed that 
clinical signs of deficiency appear at intakes of less than 0.5 to 0.6 mg/day whereas most studies 
reported normal EGRA C  values at intakes of less than 1.3 mg /day. And because there is an 
expected curvilinear biological increase of values from deficient to m inimally adequ ate, the 
requirement  for riboflavin for men was set at 1.1 mg/day and for women at 0.9 mg/day. 
Recom mended intake was set by assuming a coefficient of variation (CV)  of 10% because 
inform ation is not available on the standard deviation of the requirement for riboflavin. Since RDA 
is defined as equal to the estimated requirement plus twice the CV to cover the needs of 97 to 9 8% 
of the individuals in the group, the RDA for riboflavin was calculated as 120% of the estimated 
requirement or 120% of 1.1 for me n and 120% of 0.9 for women. The recommended  intake, after 
rounding, is thus 1.3 mg/day and 1.1mg/day respectively for men and women.  
142 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Riboflavin (Vitamin B2 ) 
Fe w additional studies estimating riboflavin requirements have been conducted in the elderly. 
Although there is a decrease in energy expenditure with aging and the estimated requireme nt for 
older adults would be expected to decrease, the IOM (19 98) report decided to use the same 
requirement  for the elderly as for younger adults. 
RN I for adults 
Men 19 - 65 years 1.3 mg/day 
Women 19 - 65 years 1.1 mg/day 
RN I for elderly 
Men >  65 years 1.3 mg/day 
Women >  65 years 1.1 mg/day 
Pregnancy and lactation 
The additional requireme nt of 0.3 mg for pregnancy is an estimate based on increased growth 
in ma ternal and foetal compa rtments. For lactating women, an estimated 0.3 mg riboflavin is 
transferred in milk daily and, because utilisation for milk production is assumed to be 70% 
efficient, the value is adjusted upward to 0.4 mg/day. 
There are no data to sugg est that the relationship between riboflavin and energy requiremen t 
for pregnant and lactating women is any different from that for wom en who are not pregnant nor 
lactating. Due to the higher guiding value for energy intake during pregnancy (+250kcal /day 
second trime ster and +500 kcal in third trimester) as well as increased energy during lactation  and 
based on average requirement for adults, a higher recomm ended intake is derived assum ing a 
coefficient of variation of 10%. 
RN I for 
pregnancy 1.4 mg/day 
lactation 1.6 mg/day 
Discussions on revised RNI for Malaysia 
The RNI values for riboflavin for Malaysia, adopted from WHO/FAO (2004), are also the same 
as those adopted by the Working Group for the Harmonisation of RDAs in Southeast Asia (Tee & 
Florentino, 2005). Appendix 6.1 provides a summary of these revised RNI, comp ared with the 
previous Malaysian RN I of 2005, the WH O/FAO (2004) recomm endations and the values 
recomm ended by IOM (1998). 
143 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Riboflavin (Vitamin B2) 
For almost all the age groups, the revised RNI is the same as those recom m ended in the 2005 
RNI. The revised recommended intakes are also similar to the IOM (1998) values. There should 
therefore be little controversy on these values. Roughead and McCormick (1991) found that m ost 
of a 1.7-mg dose of riboflavin given to healthy adults consuming at least this amount was largely 
excreted in the urine. Such findings corroborate earlier work indicating a relative saturation of 
tissue with intakes above 1.1 mg/day (FAO/WHO, 1998). 
6.8 Tolerable upper intake levels 
The absorption of riboflavin is limited when administered in high doses. Data on adverse 
effects from high oral riboflavin intake are not sufficient for risk assessme nt. Available subchronic 
data from  human studies and pharmacokinetics do not show reported oral effects on oral toxicity 
of riboflavin 
The apparent lack of harm resulting from high oral doses of the vitamin may be due to its 
limited solubility and limited capacity for absorption in the human  gastrointestinal tract. No study 
has reported significant adverse effects in human of excess riboflavin consumption from foods 
or supplements. Since it is not possible, based on the present database to derive an Tolerable 
Upp er Intake Level (UL) for riboflavin, the limited evidence available from clinical studies indicates 
that the current levels of intake of riboflavin from  all sources do not represent a risk to human 
health (European Food Safety Authority, 2006).  
The IOM (1998) concluded that the data on adverse effects from high riboflavin intake are 
not sufficient for a quantitative risk assessment, and a UL cannot be derived for the vitamin. 
6.9 Research recommendations 
The following priority areas of research are recommended: 
• The magnitude of riboflavin deficiency among high risk groups such as alcoholic individuals, 
the elderly, physically active individuals, obese individuals and vegans. 
• Efficacy of riboflavin supplementation on high risk individuals or groups. 
• Determ ine effects of food preparation and cooking methods on riboflavin content of selected 
foods to enable establishing conversion factors for calculating riboflavin losses for a wide 
variety of foods 
• Study nutrient values (including vitamin B content) of the various types of rice available in 
the market and their claims of health benefits for various chronic diseases. 
144 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Riboflavin (Vitamin B2 ) 
6.10 References 
Am erican Dietetic Association, Dieticians Canada, American College of Sports Medicine, Rodriguez 
NR , Di Marco NM and Langley S.(2009) American Co llege of Sports Medicine position stand. 
Nutrition and athletics performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc 41; 209-731. 
Ashoori M, Saedisomeolia A.( 2014) Riboflavin (vitamin B2) and oxidative stress: A review. Br J 
Nu tr 111, 1985-1991. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
Butte  NF,  Lopez-Alarcon MG, G arza C (2002) Nutrient Adequacy of Exclusive Breastfeeding for 
the Term Infant during t he First Six M onths of Lif e, 
(ww w .wh o.int/nutrition/publications/infantfeeding/nut_adequacy_of_e xc_ bfeeding_ eng.pdf, 
accessed 25 June 2013). 
EF SA (2006) Tolerable upper intake levels for vitamins and mineral. Scientific Commi ttee on food, 
Scientific Panel on Nutrition and Allergies.  European Food Safety Authority 
FAO/ WHO (199 8). Thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, vitamin B6, pantothenic acid and biotin. In:  Human 
Vitamin and Mineral Requ irements. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO Ex pert Consultation. FAO, 
Rom e; pp 31-33. 
Germ an Nutrition Society (2013) New reference values for thiam in, (vitam in B1), riboflavin 
(vitamin B2) and niacin. Ann Nutr Metab 63, 186-192. 
IOM  (1998). Riboflavin. In: Dietary References Intakes for Thiamine, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin 
B6 , Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin and Choline. F ood and Nutrition Board, 
Institute of Medicine. National Academy Press, Washington DC; chapter 5, pp 87-122. 
IPH  (2015). National Health Morbidity Survey report (NHMS ). Vo lume II. Non Commun icable 
Disease and Other Health Problems. Institute of Public Health Malaysia. 
IP H (2014). M alaysian Adults Nutrition Survey report (MANS). Volume  II. Institute of Public 
Health 
Kimmons JE, Blanck H M, Tohill BC, Zhang J, Khan LK (2006). Associations between body mass 
index and the prevalence of low micronutrient levels among US adults. Med scape Gen. Med. 
8; 59. 
Kuizon MD JR. Madriagà LA, Perlas EM, Avena JM, Marcos JA., Desnacido  RT, Fuertes MP , 
Macapinlac, (1998 ). Riboflavin requirements of Filipino children and nonpregnant, pregn ant 
and lactating wo men: studied by the erythrocyte glutathione reductase activation test. Asia 
Pac J Clin Nutr 7; 41-48. 
M anore, MM (2000) Effect of physical activity on thiamine, riboflavin and vitamin B requirements. 
Am  J Clin Nutr 72:598S-606S. 
145 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Riboflavin (Vitamin B2) 
M ohd Fairulnizal, MN , Norhayati MK, Zaiton A, Norliza AH, Rusidah S, Aswir AR, Suraiami M, 
Mohd Naeem , MN, Jo-Lyn A, Mohd Azerulazree J, Vimala B and Mohd Zainuldin T (2015. 
Nutrient content in selected commer cial rice in Malaysia: An update of M alaysian food 
com position database. Internat Fd Res J 22(2): 768-776. 
Rivlin RS. (2007). Riboflavin (vitam in B2 ). In Handbook of Vitam ins, 4th ed.; Zem pleni, J, Rucker, 
RB , McCormick, DB, Suttie, JW, Eds.; CRC  Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA,  pp. 233-251 
Roughead ZK and McC ormick DB (1991). Urinary riboflavin and its m etabolites: effects of 
riboflavin supplementation in healthy residents of rural Georgia (US A). Eur J Clin Nutr 45: 
299-307. 
Sinigaglia-Coimbra R, Lopes AC, Coim bra CG (2011). Riboflavin deficiency, brain function, and 
health. In Handbook of Behavior, Food and Nutrition; Springer: Berlin, Germany, pp. 2427- 
2449 
Strohm  D, Bechtold A, Isik N, Leschik-Bonnet E, Heseker H, Germ an Nutrition Society (2016) 
Revised reference value for the intake of thiamin, (vitamin B1), riboflavin (vitamin B2)and 
niacin. NFS Journal 3;20-24. 
Suzana S, Earland J, Powers S and Suriah AR (1999). Nu tritional status of rural elderly Malays: 
Dietary and biochemical findings. Int J Vit Nutr Res 69 (4) 277-284. 
Suzana S, Zuriati I, Afaf Ruhi AF, Suriah AR, Noor Aini MY, Fatimah A, Zaitun Y and Siti Nur Asyura 
A (2007). A multidime ntional assessment  of nutritional and health status of rural elderly. 
Asia Pac J Clin Nutr 16(2) 346-353. 
Tee ES, M ohd Ismail N, Mohd Nasir A and Khatijah I (1997 ). N utrient Compo sition of M alaysian 
Foods. 4th Edition. Malaysian Food C ompos ition Database Programme , Institute for Medical 
Research, Kuala Lumpur; 310 p. 
Tee ES and Florentino RF (2005). Recommended Dietary Allowance. H armo nization in South 
East Asia. ILSI, SEA Region Monograph Series. Singapore 
W hitfield KC, Karakochuk CD, Liu Y, Mc Cann A, Talukder A, Kroeun H, Ward M, McNulty H, Lynd 
DL, Kitts DD, Li-Chan EC Y, McLean J and Green TJ (2015). Poor thiamin and riboflavin status 
is com m on among women of childbearing age in rural and urban Cam bodia. J Nutr 145; 
628-633. 
W H O/FAO  (2004). Thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, vitamin B6, pantothenic acid and biotin. In:  Human 
Vitamin and Mineral Requirements. Sec ond Edition. Report of a Joint WHO/ FAO Expert 
Consultation. pp169-172. 
146 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Riboflavin (Vitamin B2 ) 
M alaysia (2017 )* 
Age group RNI (m g/day) 
W HO/FAO (2004) IOM  (1998) 
Appendix 6.1 C om parison of recom m ended intake for Riboflavin (Vitam in B2): RNI M alaysia (2017 ), RNI of W HO/FAO (2004) and RD A of IOM  (1998) 
Age group RNI (m g/day) Age group AI (m g/day) 
Infants Infants Infants 
0 - 5 m onths 0.3 0 - 6 m onths 0.3 0 - 6 m onths 0.3 
6 - 11 m onths 0.4 7 - 12 m onths 0.4 7 - 12 m onths 0.4 
RD A (m g/day) 
C hildren C hildren C hildren 
1 - 3 years 0.5 1 - 3 years 0.5 1 - 3 years 0.5 
4 - 6 years 0.6 4 - 6 years 0.6 4 - 8 years 0.6 
7 - 9  years 0.9 7 - 9  years 0.9 
Boys Boys Boys 
10 - 18 years 1.3 10 - 18 years 1.3 9  - 13 years 0.9 
14 - 18 years 1.3 
G irls G irls G irls 
10 - 18 years 1.0 10 - 18 years 1.0 9  - 13 years 0.9 
14 - 18 years 1.0 
M en M en M en 
19  - 65 years 1.3 19  - 65 years 1.3 19  - 30 years 1.3 
> 65 years 1.3 > 65 years 1.3 31 - 50 years 1.3 
51 - 70 years 1.3 
> 70 years 1.3 
147 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Riboflavin (Vitamin B2) 
M alaysia (2017 )* 
Age group RNI (m g/day) 
W HO/FAO (2004) IOM  (1998) 
Age group RNI (m g/day) Age group AI (m g/day) 
W om en W om en W om en 
19  - 65 years 1.1 19  - 65 years 1.1 19  - 30 years 1.1 
> 65 years 1.1 > 65 years 1.1 31 - 50 years 1.1 
51 - 70 years 1.1 
> 70 years 1.1 
Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy 
1.4 1.4 14 - 18 years 1.4 
19  - 30 years 1.4 
31 - 50 years 1.4 
Lactation Lactation Lactation 
1.6 1.6 14 - 18 years 1.6 
19  - 30 years 1.6 
31 - 50 years 1.6 
*Recom m endations sam e as RNI (2005) 
148 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
7 • Niacin (Vitamin B3) 
7.1 Introduction 
Niacin is a water-soluble vitamin, also known as vitamin B 3. Niacin is the generic term for 
nicotinic acid (pyridine 3-carboxylic acid) and nicotinamide (Pyridine-3-carboxam ide) and the 
coenzyme forms of the vitamin. Chemi cal structure of nicotinic acid is C 6H 5NO 2 and nicotinamide 
is C 6H 6N2 O .
Nicotinamide is the active form of the vitamin, which functions as a constituent of two 
coenzym es, namely, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and nicotinam ide adenine 
dinucleotide phosphate (NADP).   
7.2 Functions 
In the forms of these coenzymes, niacin functions in many biological redox reactions that 
activate about 200 dehydrogenases essential to electron transport and other cellular respiratory 
reactions. NAD functions as an electron carrier for intracellular respiration as w ell as a co-factor 
for enzymes involved in the oxidation (catabolism) of fats, proteins, carbohydrates and alcohol 
to produce energy. NADP functions as a hydrogen donor in reductive biosynthesis (anabolism), 
such as in fatty acid and steroid synthesis. Like NAD, NAD P is a cofactor for enzym es, such as 
in the oxidation of glucose-6-phosphate to ribose-5-phosphate in the pentose phosphate pathway. 
In non-redox reactions, NAD is the substrate for two classes of enzyme s that separate the 
niacin moiety from NAD and transfer ADP-ribose to proteins. A third class of enzymes  catalyses 
the form ation of cyclic ADP-ribose (Lautier et al., 1993). This molecule also functions within cells 
to provoke the release of calcium ions from internal storage sites and may  play a role in cell 
signaling (Kim, Jacobson & Jacobson, 1994). 
7.3 M etabolism 
Intestinal absorption of nicotinic acid and nicotinamide supplied from food is mediated by 
sodium ion-dependent, carrier-mediated diffusion, but a role for the hum an organic anion 
transporter 10 (hO AT10) and the intracellular protein-tyrosine kinase pathway has also been 
proposed (EFSA, 2014). 
In vivo nicotinic acid is converted to nicotinam ide, which is a precursor for nicotinamide 
adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP), which are 
essential to cells and involved in many biochemical reactions. 
Niacin circulates in the plasma as nicotinamide and nicotinic acid. Both forms  are transported 
to cells and tissues, which they enter by diffusion to perform the intracellular functions of niacin. 
Niacin is trapped within the cell as NAD or NAD P . 
The major pathway of catabolism of nicotinic acid and nicotinamide is by methy lation in the 
liver to N-m ethyl-nicotinamide (NMN ) and subsequent oxidation to N-m ethyl-2-pyridone- 
carboxamide (2-Pyr) and N-methyl-4-pyridone-carboxamide (4-Pyr). 
149 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Niacin (Vitamin B3 ) 
In humans, the two  major excretion products are NM N and 2-Pyr, which under normal 
conditions represent about 20-35% and 45-60% of niacin me tabolites, respectively. The amount 
of niacin metabolites excreted depends on the niacin and tryptophan intake. Long-term inadequate 
intake of tryptophan and niacin results in reduced urinary excretion of niacin metabolites, and can 
lead to the development of pellagra (EFSA, 2014). 
Besides dietary niacin as a source for the synthesis of NAD, it may also be synthesized in the 
liver from tryptophan, an essential am ino acid. The synthesis of niacin from tryptophan also 
depe nds on enzymes  that require vitamin B6 and riboflavin, as well as an enzyme containing 
heme. On average, 1 mg of niacin can be synthesized from 60 mg of tryptophan. Thus, 60 mg of 
tryptophan can be considered to be 1 mg o f niacin equivalent (NE) (Horwitt, Harpew r & 
H enserson, 1981). 
7 .4 D eficiencies 
Clinical evidence of niacin deficiency includes fatigue, poor appetite, diarrhoea, irritability, 
headache, emo tional instability and possible memo ry loss. These may lead to changes in the 
skin, mucosa of the mouth, stomach and intestinal tract and the nervous system. These changes 
are called “pellagra”, which means “raw skin” and are mos t pronounced in the parts of the skin 
exposed to sunligh t. Other signs and sympto m s include dizziness, vomiting, constipation or 
diarrhoea, and inflammation of the tongue and gastric mucosa. The neurological symptoms can 
include fatigue , sleeplessness, depression, mem ory loss and visual impairment. If untreated, 
pellagra is ultimately fatal. 
The intake of niacin correlates with the excretion of niacin metabolites in urine. Low  excretion 
of the niacin metabolites N-methyl nicotinamide and N-methyl-2-pyridon-5-carboxamide indicates 
a low body store. Therefore, these can serve as markers of niacin supply (Shibata & Matsua, 
1989).  
Excretion of N-meth yl nicotinamide and N-methyl-2-pyridon-5-carboxamide totaling less 
than 1.5 mg in 24 hours indicates severe niacin deficiency (Hegyi, Schw art & Hegyi, 2004). As 
the concentration of N-methyl-2-pyridon-5-carboxamide decline to the higher degree than that of 
N-met hyl nicotinamide as a result of reduced niacin intake, a ratio of less than 1.0 is a further 
indicator for niacin deficiency (Kirkland, 2014). 
At present, pellagra is rarely seen in most industrialized countries except among alcoholics 
and individuals with conditions that disrupt tryptophan pathways. However, major outbreaks have 
been described in association with humanitarian emergencies in Malawi, Mozambique, Angola, 
Zimbabw e and Nepal (Seal et al., 2007). 
7 .5 Sources 
Im portant sources of preformed niacin include beef, liver, pork, fish, anchovies, peanuts and 
other nuts, whole grains and whole-meal wheat flour. In general, foods rich in protein, with the 
exception of tryptophan-poor grains, can satisfy some of the requirement for niacin. Human milk 
contains a higher concentration of niacin than cow’s milk.   
150 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
N iacin (Vitamin B3) 
In plants, especially in mature cereal grains like corn and wheat, niacin ma y be bound to 
sugar molecules in the form of glycosides, thus significantly reducing niacin bioavailability.  
In unprepared foods, niacin is present mainly in the form of the cellular pyridine nucleotides 
NA D and NADP . Enzymatic hydrolysis of the coenzymes can occur during the course of food 
preparation. Significant amounts of niacin can be lost if large quantities of liquid are used in 
preparation and cooking of food sources. Whole grains and who legrain products, seeds and nuts 
are good sources of niacin for vegetarians. Table 7.1 provides examples of food with substantial 
am ounts of niacin in 100 g portion of the food. 
Table 7.1 Niacin content of foods 
Food Niacin (mg/100g) 
Fish, meat and poultry 
Tuna (cooked)* 22.1 
Anchovy, dried 13.2 
Liver 11.5 
Pork (Cooked and lean)* 10.9 
Beef (C ooked lean rib)* 9.0 
Beef extract 5.6 
Pomfret, black (bawal hitam) 4.2 
Sardine, canned 3.5 
Beef, lean 3.4 
Mackerel (Tenggiri batang) 3.2 
Chicken, breast meat 3.1 
Cereal & cereal products 
Whea t flour, whole-meal 10.2 
Biscuit, peanut & coconut 11.3 
Barley, pearl (beras belanda) 3.4 
Glutinous rice, black 3.4 
Rice, polished 3.3 
Siam rice, polished# 1.1 
Basm ati rice, polished# 1.1 
Fragrant rice, polished# 0.9 
Rice, cooked 0.0 
Legume &  Legume products 
Peanut 11.7 
Sunflower  seed* 8.3 
Tempeh 3.7 
Soy bean, black 3.4 
151 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Niacin (Vitamin B3 ) 
Food Niacin (mg/100g) 
Soy bean noodle 2.9 
Dhal, Mysore (Orange) 2.4 
Red G ram  (kacang merah) 2.3 
Gr een gram  (Kacang hijau) 1.8 
Vegetables 
M ushrooms (Portobello)* 6.3 
Gr een peas 2.1 
Avocado 1.7 
Source: Tee et al., (1997),*USDA Food Com position Database (2015) and #Mohd Faizulnizal et al., (2015) 
7 .6 Factors affecting niacin requirement 
Bioavailability of niacin varies depending on the food sources. From ma ture cereal grains, 
only 30% of niacin is available because it is largely bound. The bioavailability can be increased 
by treating the grains with alkali. For enrichment and fortification of food, free form of niacin is 
used, thus making it highly available. Food s that contain niacin in the free form  include beans and 
liver. 
The conversion of tryptophan to niacin may be affected by a numbe r of factors. There are 
several dietary, drug and disease factors that reduce this conversion, such as use of oral 
contraceptives. The requirement for pre-formed niacin is increased by factors that reduce the 
conversion of tryptophan to niacin. It tends to be lower with higher tryptophan intakes and during 
pregnancy, when conversion is more efficient.  
There is also an interdependence of enzymes within the tryptophan-to-niacin pathway where 
vitamin B6 (as pyridoxal phosphate), riboflavin (as FAD) and iron are functional. Further, riboflavin 
(as FM N) is required for the oxidase that forms coenzyme pyridoxal 5’-phosphate from the alcohol 
and amine forms of phospho rylated vitamin B6. Therefore, inadequate iron, riboflavin, or vitamin 
B6 status decreases the conversion of tryptophan to niacin. 
Variation in the levels of energy intake may influence niacin requireme nt. However, there are 
no directly relevant data that examined this relationship. Despite this lack of direct experimental 
data, the known biochemical function of riboflavin in the me tabolism of carbohydrate sugge sts 
that at least a small (10%) adjustme nt be made to the estimated requirement to reflect differences 
in the average energy utilization and size of men and women (IOM, 1998). A 10% increase in the 
requireme nt is also suggested to cover increased energy utilization during pregnancy, and a sm all 
increase in the requirement to account for the efficiency of niacin use during lactation. 
152 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
N iacin (Vitamin B3) 
7.7 Setting requirements and recommended intake of niacin 
Niacin was included in the Malaysia RNI 2005. There w ere no local data available to help 
establish niacin requiremen ts. The Technical Sub -Committee (TSC)  on vitam ins review ed the 
consultation report of W HO/FAO (2004) and IOM (1998) DRI recom m endations. In reviewing 
these reports, considerations we re given to the rationale and steps for arriving at the RNI for 
niacin, the levels of niacin recomme nded for different age categories. The TSC on vitamins decided 
to adopt the WHO/FAO  (2004) recommendations for niacin intake for Malaysia RNI 2005. 
In this 2017 review  of RNI for Malaysia, the TSC on Vitam ins again did not have any local 
publications on niacin status or requirem ent. There we re also no updated recommendations from 
WH O /FAO  or IOM . The additional reference from an international scientific organization that was 
available was the report of the European Food Safety Authority (EFS A, 2014). The EFSA report 
noted that in the absence of new data, the recommended intakes adopted the requirement 
proposed by Scientific Commi ttee for Food of 1993. 
The TSC  on Vitamins therefore decided to continue to adopt the WH O/FAO ( 2004) 
recomm ended intake for niacin for the 2017 version of Malaysia RNI. These recomme ndations, 
which are similar to RNI for Malaysia (2005), are given in bold in the following paragraphs 
according to age groups. The proposed RNI are summarised in Appendix 7.1. 
Infants 
The adequate intake for niacin for infants ages 0 through 6 months is based on the reported 
m ean volume of milk (0.78 L/day) consumed  by this age group, the estimated niacin concentration 
in human milk of 1.8 mg/l and the tryptophan content of human milk (210 mg/l). Thus the IOM 
(1998) recommended intake for niacin for infants (0-6 months) is 2 mg of preforme d niacin. 
One of the methods that can be used to determine adequate intake of niacin for infants 7-12 
mont hs is to use the estimated niacin content of human milk as 1.1 mg/l and a mean milk volume 
of 0.6L, and adding the amount of niacin provided by solid foods (8 mg). The amount of niacin 
equivalents (NE) thus obtained would be 9 mg/day. The IOM (1998) DRI Committee  felt that this 
amo unt was too high and used the approach of extrapolating from estimated average requirement 
of adults to estimate adequate intake for this group of infants. Thus, IOM (1998) set the adequate 
intake for infants 7 through 12 months as 4 mg/day of NEs. 
RN I for infants 
0 - 5 months 2 mg/day of NEs 
6 - 11 months 4 mg/day of NEs 
Children and adolescents 
Since there was no available data on which to base the requiremen ts for children or 
adolescents, the DRI C om mittee of IO M (1998) had based the recom mende d intakes for these 
groups on extrapolation from adult values. The recommended intake was determined as 130% 
of the EAR.  
153 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Niacin (Vitamin B3 ) 
RNI for children 
1 - 3 years 6 mg/day of NEs 
4 - 6 years 8 mg/day of NEs 
7 - 9 years 12 mg/day of NEs 
RNI for adolescents 
Boys 10 - 18 years 16 mg/day of NEs 
Girls 10 - 18 years 16 mg/day of NEs 
In teenage (age of 14 - 17 years old) pregnancy and lactating, EFSA (2014) provided an 
additional requirement for niacin of 1 mg NE/day and 3 mg NE/day respectively.  
Adults and elderly 
The metabolites of niacin excretion, N1-methyl-nicotinamide and its 2-pyridone derivative are 
though t to be the best biochemi cal measure for estimating niacin requireme nt. An average niacin 
requirement  can be estimated as the niacin intake corresponding to an excretion of N1-methyl- 
nicotinamide that is above the minimal excretion at which pellagra symptoms  occur. A urinary 
excretion value for N1-methyl-nicotinamide of 1.0 mg/day has been chosen as the level of niacin 
excretion that reflects a niacin intake that is minimal or barely adequate. 
Upo n reviewing data from  four experimental studies, the IOM  (19 98 ) DR I Co mmittee 
observed that the overall average intake equivalent to the excretion of 1 mg/day of N1-methyl- 
nicotinamide was 11.6 ( 3.94, with a CV of 34%. It was also assume d that w omen have a slightly 
lower requirem ent than men  because of their size and average energy utilization. The average 
requirement was estimated to be 12 mg/day NEs for men and 11 mg/day of NEs for women. 
There are insufficient data to determine whether the niacin requirement changes with age in adults. 
The FAO /WHO (2004) consultation also felt that there are insufficient data to justify changes in 
requirement s for the elderly for most of the B vitamins, including niacin. 
Taking into consideration the wide variation in the efficiency of converting tryptophan to 
niacin, the DRI Comm ittee assumed a higher coefficient of variation (CV) of 15%. The daily 
recomm ended intake for adults was thus calculated as 130% of the estimated requirement or 16 
mg N Es for men and 14 mg NEs for women. 
RNI for adults 
Men 19 - 65 years 16 mg/day of NEs 
Women 19 - 65 years 14 mg/day of NEs 
RNI for elderly 
Men > 65 years 16 mg/day of NEs 
Women > 65 years 16 mg/day of NEs 
154 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
N iacin (Vitamin B3) 
Pregnancy and lactation 
During pregnancy, it is estimated that the need for niacin increases by 3 mg/day of NEs to 
cover increased energy utilization and growth in maternal and fetal compartme nts, especially 
during the second and third trimesters. Thus, the estimated niacin requireme nt is 14 mg/day of 
niacin equivalents during pregnancy with no adjustme nt being made for the woman ’s age. As has 
been explained for adult requirement, a CV of 15% is assumed for niacin requirement.The 
calculated recomm ended intake for niacin during pregnancy is thus 130% of the requirement or 
18 mg NEs per day. 
For lactating women, an estimated 1.4 mg of preformed niacin is secreted daily into breast 
milk. To cover the energy expenditure involved in milk production, 1 mg  is further added. 
Therefore, for wom en who are exclusively breastfeeding an infant, the additional amount of niacin 
nee ded is 2.4 mg/day of NEs. Taking into consideration the CV for niacin requirement, the 
recomm ended intake during lactation is 17 mg/day of NEs. 
RN I for 
Pregnancy 18 mg/day of NEs 
Lactation 17 mg/day of NEs 
Discussions on revised RNI for M alaysia 
The RNI values for niacin for M alaysia 2017, adapted from WHO/FAO (2004), are also the 
same as those adopted by the Working Group for the Harmonization of RDAs in Southeast Asia 
(Tee & Florentino 2002). Appendix 7.1 provides a summary of these revised RNI, compared with 
the previous RNI (2005), the recommendat ions of WHO/F AO  (2004), IO M (199 8) and EFSA 
(2014). 
The TSC  on Vitamins felt that the proposed RNI can be easily met  by adhering to the 
recomm ended dietary guidelines.  Moreover, deficiency of this vitamin has not been reported in 
the country for over 50 years. 
7.8 Tolerable upper intake levels 
Niacin toxicity is rarely observed at doses generally consumed and niacin from foods is not 
know n to cause adverse effects. Nevertheless, considerations should still be given to intake of 
niacin as a supplement and fortified foods. 
Sym ptom s of acute toxicity include flushing, itching of skin, nausea, vomiting and 
gastrointestinal disturbances. In addition, jaundice, hyperglycemia, abdom inal pain, elevated 
serum bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase and aminotransferase levels can be seen with ingestion of 
high levels of nicotinic acid (generally intakes of 3,000 mg/day or more ) for long periods of time.   
155 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Niacin (Vitamin B3 ) 
The Tolerable Upper Intake (UL) Level of 35 mg/day as proposed by IOM  (19 98 ) was adopted 
by the FAO/ WHO (2004) Consultation G roup. This value was also set for pregnant and lactating 
adult women.  
The UL of 35 mg/day was adjusted for children and adolescents on the basis of relative body 
w eight and using revised reference weights. The UL is not meant to apply to individuals who are 
being treated with a nutrient under medical supervision, such as for low ering of cholesterol levels. 
The UL recomme nded by IOM (1998) are given in Table 7.2. 
Table 7.2 Tolerable Upper Intake (UL) levels of niacin for various age groups 
Age groups m g/day niacin equivalents 
Infants 0 - 12 months Not possible to establish 
1 - 3 years 10 
C hildren 4 - 8 years 15 
9 - 13 years 20 
Adolescents, 14 - 18 years 30 
M en, 19 years and older 35 
W omen, 19 years and older 35 
Pregnant women 35 
Lactating women 35 
7 .9 Research recommendations 
The following priority areas of research are recommended: 
• Determination of niacin status and extent of deficiency among high risk groups 
• Identification of more sensitive and specific biochemical measures of niacin status 
• Identification of specific roles or functions of niacin in disease prevention 
• Determine effects of food preparation and cooking methods on niacin content of selected 
foods to enable establishing conversion factors for calculating niacin losses for a wide variety 
of foods. 
Source: IOM  (1998) 
156 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
N iacin (Vitamin B3) 
7.10 References 
EFS A (2014). Scientific Opinion on Dietary Reference Values for niacin 1. Panel on Dietetic 
Products, Nutrition and Allergies (NDA). European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), Parma, 
Italy. 
Hegyi J, Sch wartz RA , & Hegyi V (2004). Pellagra: dermatitis, demen tia, and diarrhea. Int J 
De rma tol (43): 1 - 5. 
H orwitt MK, Harpewr AE & Henserson LM. (1981). Niacin-tryptophan relationships for evaluating 
niacin equivalents.  Am J Clin Nutr 34: 423- 427. 
IOM  (1998). Niacin. In: Dietary References Intakes for Thiamine, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B6 , 
Folate, Vitamin B12 , Pantothenic Acid, Biotin and Choline. F ood and Nutrition Board, Institute 
of Medicine. National Academy Press, Washington DC; chapter 6, pp 123-149 
Kim H, Jacobson EL & Jacobson MK (1994). NAD glycohydrolases: A possible function in calcium 
homeostasis. Mol Cell Biochem 138: 237-243. 
Kirkland JB (2014). Niacin. In: Mod ern Nutrition in Health and Disease. Ross, Caballero, Cousins, 
Tucker, & Ziegler (Eds) 11th Edition. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp: 331- 
340. 
Lautier D, Lagueux J, Thibodeau J, Menard L & Poirier GG (1993). Molecular and biochemical 
features of poly (ADP-ribose) metabolism. Mol Cell Biochem 122:171-193 
M alfait P , Moren A, Dillon JC, Brodel A, Begkoyian G, Etchegorry MG, Malenga G & Hakew ill P 
(1993). An outbreak of pellagra related to changes in dietary niacin among Mozambican 
refugees in Malawi. Inter J Epidemiol 22: 504-511 
M ohd Fairulnizal MN, Norhayati MK, Zaiton A, Norliza AH, Rushidah S, Asw ir AR , Suraiami M, 
Mohd N aeem M N, Jo-Lyn A, Mohd Azerulazree J, Vimala B & Mohd Zainuldin T (2015). 
Nutrient content in selected commer cial rice in Malaysia: An ipdate of Malaysian food 
composition database. International Food Research Journal 22(2): 768-776. 
Seal AJ, Creeke PI , Dibari P , Cheing E, Kyroussis E, Semedo P & Briel Tvd (2007). Low and 
deficient niacin and pellagra are endemic in postwar Angola. Am J Clin Nutr 85: 218 - 224. 
Sh ibata K, & Matsuo H (1989). Correlation between niacin equivalent intake and unrinary excretion 
of its metabolites, N-Methylnicotinamide, N-M ethyl-2-pyridone-5-carboxamide, and N- 
Meth yl-4-pyridone-3-carboxamide , in human consumin g a self-selected food. Am J Clin 
Nu tr 50: 114 -119. 
Tee ES, Ismail MN, Mohd Nasir A & Kahtijah I (1997). Nutrient comp osition of Ma layisan foods 
(4th Edition), Malaysian Food Co mposition Database Programm e, Institute for Med ical 
Research, Kuala Lumpur; p310. 
157 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Niacin (Vitamin B3 ) 
U SD A Food Composition Database 2015. 
https://www .healthaliciousness.com /nutritionfacts/nutrition-comp arison.php 
W HO/F AO (2004). Thiamine, riboflavin, niacin, vitamin B6, pantothenic acid, and biotin. In: 
Hu ma n Vitamin and Mineral Requirements in human nutrition. Report of a Joint FA O/W HO 
Expert Consultation. FAO , Rome; pp 173-175. 
158 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
N iacin (Vitamin B3) 
M alaysia (2017 )* 
Age group RNI (m g/day) 
E FSA (2014) # W HO/FAO (2004) IOM  (1998) 
Appendix 7 .1 C om parison of recom m ended nutrient intake for Niacin: RNI M alaysia (2017 ), PRI of E FSA (2014), RNI of W HO/FAO (2004), 
AI and RD A of IOM  (1998) 
Age group PRI (m g/day) Age group RNI (m g/day) Age group AI (m g/day) 
Infants Infants Infants Infants 
0 - 5 m onths 2 0 - 5 m onths NA 0 - 6 m onths 2 0 - 6 m onths 2
6 - 11 m onths 4 7 - 11 m onths 7 - 12 m onths 4 7 - 12 m onths 4
Boys 4.2 - 4.8 
G irls 3.7 - 4.4 
RD A (m g NE /day) 
C hildren C hildren C hildren C hildren 
1 - 3 years 6 1 - 3 year 1 - 3 years 6 1 - 3 years 6
Boys 5.1 - 7.7 
G irls 4.6 - 7.2 
4 - 6 years 8 4 - 6 years 4 - 6 years 8 4 - 8 years 8
Boys 8.2 - 9 .2 
G irls 7.6 - 8.6 
7 - 9  years 12 7 - 9  years 7 - 9  years 12 
Boys 9 .8 - 11.0 
G irls 9 .1 - 10.2 
Boys Boys Boys Boys 
10 - 18 years 16 10 - 18 years 12.6 - 19 .2 10 - 18 years 16 9  - 13 years 12 
14 - 18 years 16 
G irls G irls G irls G irls 
10 - 18 years 16 10 - 18 years 11.9  - 14.9 10 - 18 years 16 9  - 13 years 12 
14 - 18 years 14 
159 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Niacin (Vitamin B3 ) 
M alaysia (2017 )* 
Age group RNI (m g/day) 
E FSA (2014) # W HO/FAO (2004) IOM  (1998) 
Age group PRI (m g/day) Age group RNI (m g/day) Age group AI (m g/day) 
M en M en M en M en 
19  - 65 years 16 19  - 60 years 14.4 - 15.3 19  - 65 years 16 19  - 30 years 16 
> 65 years 16 > 60 years 12.9  - 13.2 > 65 years 16 31 - 50 years 16 
51 - 70 years 16 
> 70 years 16 
W om en W om en W om en W om en 
19  - 65 years 14 19  - 60 years 11.6 - 12.3 19  - 65 years 14 19  - 30 years 14 
> 65 years 14 > 60 years 10.5 - 10.6 > 65 years 14 31 - 50 years 14 
51 - 70 years 14 
> 70 years 14 
Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy 
18 1st trim ester + 0.5 18 14 - 18 years 18 
2nd trim ester +1.7 19  - 30 years 18 
3rd trim ester +3.3 31 - 50 years 18 
Lactation Lactation Lactation Lactation 
17 (0-6 m onths +3.3 17 14 - 18 years 17 
post-partum ) 19  - 30 years 17 
31 - 50 years 17 
#The Average Recom m endation (ARs) for niacin in m g NE/day w ere calculated from  the ARs for niacin of 1.3 m g NE/M J (5.6 m f NE/1000 kcal) using ARs for 
energy according to Scientific O pinion on Dietary Reference Values for energy (EF SA NDA Panel, 2013), and the PRIs w ere calculated assum ing a C V of 10% . 
* Recom m endations are sim ilar to RNI (2005) 
160 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
8 • Pantothenic Acid (Vitamin B5) 
8.1 Introduction 
Pantothenic acid is a water-soluble vitamin, also known as vitamin B5. Pantothenic acid 
consists of pantoic acid and ß-alanine joined by the amide linkage. The chem ical formula is 
C 9H17N O 5. It will be converted to form pantetheine and then converts again into the only known 
biologically active form w hich is the pantethine. Pantethine, is the active form and the stable 
disulphide form of pantetheine. It is the major precursor of coenzyme  A (CoA) after the chemical 
structure of vitamin B5 is connected by two sulfur atoms that play a central role in the lipid and 
carbohydrate metabolism. The properties of vitamin B5 are easily destroyed when during heating 
and freezing. Also, it is stable when dry and in solution at a neutral pH but destroyed in acidic and 
alkaline solutions. Pantothenic acid is yellow, viscous, oily, and readily soluble in water, alcohol, 
and dioxane, but it is rarely soluble in diethyl ether and acetone. It is insoluble in benzene and 
chloroform  (Gonzalez-Lopez, Jesus, et al., 2016). 
8.2 Functions 
Pantothen ic acid helps the body convert food (carbohydrates) into fuel (glucose), which the 
body uses to produce energy. It helps the body use fats and protein. In addition to playing a role 
in the breakdown of fats and carbohydrates for energy, pantothenic acid is critical to the 
manufacture of red blood cells, as well as sex and stress-related horm ones produced in the 
adrenal glands. It is also important in maintaining a healthy digestive tract, and it helps the body 
use other vitamins, particularly riboflavin. 
Pantothen ic acid is required for other vitamin syntheses which are vitamin A and vitamin D. 
It also enhances the process of cell division, and protein synthesis thus promo tes wound healing 
(We iman n & Hermann, 1999) and post-surgical therapy. Besides, it helps in alcohol detoxification 
which is m etabolism of acetaldehyde (Chernikevich, Dorofeev & Mo iseenok, 19 92 ). Lastly, 
pantothenic acid also functions in immuni ty where it helps fight viral hepatitis (Komar, 1990). 
8.3 M etabolism 
Pantothen ic acid is used in CoA and acyl carrier proteins (AC P), which carry and transfer 
acetyl and acyl groups, respectively. In vivo effects of pantothenic acid are thought to be a result 
of its incorporation into these molecules. CoA is an essential cofactor in fatty acid oxidation, lipid 
elongation, and fatty acid synthesis. It is involved in the production of many secondary metabolites 
such as polyisoprenoid-containing com pounds, steroid molecules, acetylated compounds, 
acetylated neurotransmitters, prostaglandins and prostaglandin-like compo unds. In vitro evidence 
suggests that biotin and pantothenic acid use the same sodium -dependent, specialized carrier- 
me diated system  for uptake in colonic epithelial cells. In this rodent experiment, pantothenic acid 
caused a concentration-dependent competitive inhibition in biotin uptake. That means high 
pantothenic acid intake could inhibit the absorption of biotin in the large intestine (Said et al., 
1998). 
Be ing an integral part of coenzyme-A (CoA), the pantothenic acid has critical roles in nutrient 
met abolism  including metabolism of energy-producing nutrients such as carbohydrate, lipids, 
and protein. Sodium-dependent mu ltivitamin transporter (SMV T) carrier is responsible for the 
161 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pantothenic Acid (Vitamin B5) 
uptake of lower concentration of pantothenic acid into organs and by passive diffusion when 
present in high concentrations (Prasad et al., 1999). The bioavailability of pantothenic acid is 
suggested in the range of 40%- 61% by estimated urinary pantothenic acid excretion. 
Pantothenic acid is excreted in urine, after hydrolysis of CoA  in a multistep reaction. In a 
few  groups of healthy subjects, average daily urinary excretion of pantothenic acid was observed 
to range between  about 2.0  and  3.5mg/day  in  children  and  adolescents (Schm idt,  1951; 
Kathman  &  Kies,  198 4; Eissenstat, Wyse & Hansen, 1986) and betwee n about 2.0mg   and 
4.0mg/day in  adults (Schmidt, 1951; Fox & Linkswiler, 1961; Fry, Fox & Tao, 1976; Kathman & 
Kies, 1984; Song et al., 1985). Urinary excretion of pantothenic acid is positively correlated with 
pantothenic acid intakes. CoA is hydrolysed to pantothenate, and the pantothenic acid is excreted 
intact in urine. 
Pantothenic acid is a water-soluble vitam in, wh ich mea ns that it cannot be stored by the 
body and must  be replenished every day. Supplement storage between 15° and 30°C in a cool, 
dry place away from direct heat, light, and moisture. Dietary CoA is  hydrolysed in  the intestine 
to dephospho-Co A, phosphopantetheine, and pantetheine. Pantetheine is further hydrolysed to 
pantothenic acid (Trumbo, 2014). Intestinal absorption of pantothenic acid occurs via saturable 
sodium-dependen t carrier-m ediated process (Stein & Diamond, 1989; Prasad et al., 199 9). In 
blood, pantothenic acid is transported mainly as CoA within erythrocytes (Trumbo, 2014). 
Pantothenic acid uptake in tissues occurs through an active sodium-dependent mechanism. Mos t 
of the pantothenic acid in tissues  is present  as  CoA,  mainly found  in mitochondria,  with lesser 
amounts present  as acyl-carrier protein and free pantothenic acid. 
8.4 Sources 
Pantothenic acid is present in a wide variety of foods (Table 8.1). Foods rich in pantothenic 
acid include mea t (products), eggs, nuts, avocados and cruciferous vegetables (F SA, 2002; 
Anses/CI QUA L, 2012). The main contributors to pantothenic acid intakes include meat products, 
bread, milk-based products and vegetables (Afssa, 2009; DGE, 2012). Currently, pantothenic acid 
(as D-pantothenate, calcium; D-pantothenate, sodium or dexpanthenol) may be added to foods 
and food supplements. 
162 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pantothenic Acid (Vitam in B5) 
Food m g per 100g 
Poultry, meats, fish, 
Oily fish (Trout cooked) 2.2 
Beef & Veal (Veal Shoulder, Cooked) 1.6 
Lean Pork (Sirloin, Cooked) 1.6 
Eggs 1.5 
Chicken patty, frozen, cooked 1.1 
Chicken breast tenders, breaded, cooked, microwaved 1.0 
Fruits 
Avocados 1.4 
Apricots, dehydrated, sulfured, uncooked 1.1 
Dates, deglet noor 0.6 
Vegetables 
Mushr ooms (Shiitake, Cooked) 3.6 
Seew eed, spirulina, dried 3.5 
Sw eet Potato (Baked) 0.9 
Broccoli 0.4 
Cereals and grains 
Rice bran, crude 7.4 
Sunflower  Seeds 7.1 
Milk and dairy products 
Cheese (Gjetost) 3.4 
Yogur t (plain, non-fat) 0.7 
Milk 0.4 
Table 8.1: Pantothenic acid content of foods 
Source: USDA, 2015 
163 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pantothenic Acid (Vitamin B5) 
8.5 D eficiency 
Pantothenic acid is ubiquitous in foods and dietary deficiency is rare. Deficiency symptoms 
have been described in subjects on a pantothenic acid antagonist and/or pantothenic acid-deficient 
diet and include mood changes, as well as sleep, neurological, cardiac and gastrointestinal 
disturbances (Smith & Song, 1996; SCF, 2002; Trumbo , 2014). Based on the deficiency 
experiments done on the human subjects in the mid-to-late 1950’s, the signs and symptoms of 
pantothenic deficiency are commonl y fatigue, malaise, apathy, headache and muscle weakness. 
O ther symptoms  reported are gastrointestinal com plaints such as nausea, vomiting, abdominal 
cramps, epigastric burning sensation, and increased flatulence (Sampe dro et al., 2015). 
There are also some neurobiological effects that include numbness, paresthesia in toes and 
on the soles of feet, muscle cramps, and staggering gait. Other symptoms associated with a 
deficiency in pantothenic acid are sleep disturbances, emo tional disorders, and personality 
changes. Deficiency of pantothenic acid will decrease the synthesis of Keratinocyte Grow th Factor 
(KGF ) and procollagen 4a2 in fibroblasts which result in the reduction of keratinocyte 
differentiation and proliferation (Kobayashi et. al., 2011). 
Laboratory analysis to determine pantothenic acid concentration of hum an milk from healthy 
mot hers has been carried out using standard microbiological methods such as m icrobiological 
assay using Lactobacillus arabinosus or Lactobacillus plantarum and radioimmunoassay (EFSA , 
2014). 
Pantothenic acid concentration in erythrocytes or whole blood has also been determined in 
laboratory analysis. In the study among adolescents by Eissenstat et al. (1986), positive 
correlations w ere also reported between pantothenic acid intakes and its concentrations in 
erythrocytes or in whole blood (mean intake of about 5 m g/day from  food only). A positive 
correlation between pantothenic acid intakes and its concentrations in whole blood has also been 
observed in older adults (Srinivasan et al., 1981). 
Urinary excretion of pantothenic acid and, to a lesser extent, pantothenic acid concentration 
in whole blood or erythrocytes reflect pantothenic acid intake. Data from the general population 
are limited so that the variability characteristics of these biomarkers and their ability to 
discriminate between pantothenic acid insufficiency and adequacy are not well known . No  cut-off 
values have been established for these biomarkers (EFSA, 2014). 
8.6 Factors affecting pantothenic acid requirements 
Fe w investigations about the effect of pantethine treatment on the platelet function have been 
done. It has been shown that oral treatment with pantethine helps to lower the total cholesterol 
and total phospholipids significantly, not only in the plasma but also in the platelet while 
m aintaining their ratio. The pantethine may affect the fluidity of the cell membrane of platelet 
composition. Thus, some suggestions have been made that pantethine supplementation could 
prevent atherogen esis by its effectiveness on serum lipid profile and platelet agg regability in 
people (H orvath & Vecsei, 2009). 
164 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pantothenic Acid (Vitam in B5) 
Specific considerations during pregnancy and lactation 
Two sm all cohort studies in pregnant and lactating women and non-pregnant, non-lactating 
wo me n provide data on pantothenic acid intakes as well as urinary pantothenic acid excretion 
(Song et al., 1985) and whole blood pantothenic acid concentration (Song et al., 1985). Mean 
pantothenic acid intakes were between 5.3 and 6.2 mg/day in pregnant and lactating women and 
betw een 4.8 and 5.0 mg/day in controls. In both studies, average urinary pantothenic acid 
excretion levels were lower than intakes in all groups of women. Results were inconsistent with 
respect to differences in urinary excretion of pantothenic acid between pregnant or lactating and 
non-pregnant, non-lactating women. 
Song et al. (198 5) observed that concentrations of pantothenic acid in whole blood were 
significantly lower in pregnant and lactating women than in non-pregnant, non-lactating women, 
and significantly lower in pregnant women than in lactating wom en. The ESFA Panel (2014) 
concludes that data on biomarkers in pregnant and lactating wo m en are scarce and provide 
inconsistent results and cannot be used to infer on a difference in the pantothenic acid status of 
pregnant and lactating women compared with non-pregnant, non-lactating women. 
Assuming an average breast milk pantothenic acid concentration of 2.5 mg/L and an average 
breast milk secretion of 0.8 L/day over the first six months of lactation (Butte, Lopez-Alarcon & 
Garza, 2002; WHO/FA O , 2004; EFSA, 2014), the Panel notes that mean pantothenic acid secretion 
in milk is 2 mg/day in fully breast-feeding women. 
8.7 Setting requirements and recommended intakes of pantothenic acid 
There were no recomm endations for pantothenic acid in the previous version of RNI (2005). 
There are no local studies available on pantothenic acid requirements that the Technical Sub 
C ommit tee (TSC ) on Vitamins could use as a reference w hen  considering RNI for the vitamin. 
There are also no local studies of the biochemial status of the population.  The main references 
used by the TSC to establish intake of pantothenic acid were W HO/FA O (2004), IO M (1998) and 
EFS A (2014). The rationale and steps taken in setting the requiremen ts and the levels 
recomm ended by these organisations were considered. 
According to EFS A (2014), there are not many evidence and studies done on pantothenic 
acid. There are only a few reports of the biochemical status of the pantothenic acid among the 
population group. The TSC on Vitamins accepts the approach taken by WH O/FA O (2004), the 
m ain reference of the TSC and decided to adopt these values as the RNI for pantothenic acid for 
M alaysia 2017. As will be discussed later in this chapter, these values are generally similar to the 
recom me ndations of EFSA  (2014). Hence, the TSC decided n ot to adopt the EFSA 
recomm endations although this is the latest publication on recommended intake for pantothenic 
acid. These values are given in the bold in the following paragraphs according to age groups and 
sum marised in Appendix 8.1. 
165 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pantothenic Acid (Vitamin B5) 
Infants 
Infants aged between 0 to 6 months usually consumed hum an milk as it is the optimal milk 
source for infants. Besides that, it is recommended to consume huma n milk throughout the first 
year of life because of its nutritional value. Human milk also contains pantothenic acid. Based on 
IOM  (1998 ), the estima ted concentration of pantothenic acid in human m ilk is between 2.2 to 2.5 
ml/L. Thus, AI for pantothenic acid for infants aged between 0 to 6 months is 1.7 mg/day. While 
the AI for infants aged betwee n 7 to 12 months is 1.8 mg/day as it is the mean obtained from  two 
me thods of extrapolation which is by extrapolating the AI for pantothenic acid for younger infants 
aged 0 to 6 months and also AI for adults to estimate a recommended intake. The values for both 
extrapolations are 2.2 mg/day and 1.4 mg/day respectively. 
For infants over six months, an AI of 3 mg/day is proposed by extrapolating from the 
pantothenic acid intake of exclusively breast-fed infants aged zero to six months, using allometric 
scaling and reference body weight for each age group, in order to account for the role of 
pantothenic acid in energy metabolism (ESFA, 2014). 
Germ an Society of Nutrition - Austrian Society of Nutrition - Swiss Society of Nutrition 
Research - Swiss Association for Nutrition (D-A-CH) (2013), WHO/F AO (2004) and Afssa (2001) 
proposed AIs for infants aged 7-12 months based on extrapolation from typical pantothenic acid 
intakes with huma n milk in younger exclusively breast-fed infants. Following the same approach, 
IOM  (1998) estimated a value of 2.2 mg/day, while a value of 1.4 mg/day was obtained by 
dow nward extrapolation of the AI for adults using allometric scaling (body w eight to the power 
of 0.75 and reference body weights) and allowing for the needs for grow th by addition of a grow th 
factor; thus, an AI of 1.8 mg/day was set for infants aged 7-12 months, being the mean of both 
values. 
RNI for infants 
0 - 5 months             1.7 mg/day 
6 - 11 months           1.8 mg/day 
Children and adolescents 
The same recom mendation in term of adequ ate intake (AI) was made for the intake of 
children and adolescent by the FAO/WHO Consultation as well as the IOM (1998). AI are used 
instead as no data were found on which to base an Estimated Average Requirement (EAR) and 
thus a Recom me nded Dietary Allowance (RDA) for pantothenic acid for children or adolescents 
of any age group. The data for IOM are tabulated by extrapolating extrapolation downwar d from 
the EAR for the children by adjusting for metabolic body size and growth and adding a factor for 
variability. The same approaches are used to establish AI for the adolescent. 
166 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pantothenic Acid (Vitam in B5) 
The AI for children and adolescents is set at 4 and 5 mg/day, respectively, based on observed 
intakes in the EU (EF SA, 2014). Estima tes of pantothenic acid intakes in children and adolescents, 
adults and older adults were available from eight EU countries. In boys and girls (3-12 years), 
m ean/median intakes of 3.0 to 5.7 mg/day were reported, while mean/median intakes of 3.0 to 
7.2 mg/day were observed in adolescent boys and girls (11-19 years) (EF SA, 2014). 
D-A-CH  (2013) derived AIs for children by interpolation between the values for infants. IOM 
(1998) extrapolated the AIs for children and adolescents from the AI of adults using allome tric 
scaling and allowing for the needs for growth by the addition of a growth factor, which resulted 
in values consistent with available observed intakes for these age groups and intakes associated 
with blood and urinary pantothenic acid concentrations considered adequate. 
AI for children 
1 - 3 years                    2 mg/day 
4 - 6 years                    3 mg/day 
7 - 9 years                    4 mg/day 
AI for adolescents 
Boys 10-18 years      5 mg/day 
Girls 10-18 years      5 mg/day 
Adult and Elderly 
The AI for adults is set at 5 mg/day. In adult men and wome n below 65 years, mea n/ median 
intakes of 3.2 to 6.3 mg/day were reported, while mean/ median intakes were between 2.2 and 
6.0 mg/day in older men and women. 
Study by Tarr, Tamura and Stokstad (1981), reported that average American diet used 
contained 5.8 mg/day of pantothenate, as reported for small groups of U.S. adults and 
adolescents. As there is no evidence the range of intake is inadequate, therefore an average value 
of 5 mg/day is set as the AI for adults. Dietary Reference Intakes for Japanese (M inistry of Health, 
Labour and We lfare, 2015) as well recommended AI of 5 mg/day pantothenic acid for both adults 
and elderly except wom en adults that were recommended at 4 gm/day. 
A study by Srinivasan et al. (1981), which involved elderly aged 65 years and older, state that 
pantothenic acid intakes from food averaged 2.9 mg/1,000 kcal, or 5.9 ± 0.1 mg/day (range 2.5 
- 9.5 mg/day). Thus, urinary pantothenic acid excretion of unsupplemented individuals averaged 
6 mg/day. These data support the adequacy of the 5.9 mg/day intake from diet alone. There is no 
relationship between urinary excretion and age. Thus, as there is no basis to expect increased of 
pantothenic acid requirements in the elderly, the same recommendation as the younge r adult is 
set for elderly, aged 51 years and older, at 5 mg/day. Similarly, there is no basis for determining 
a separate recommendation based on gender, so the AIs for men and women are the same. 
167 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pantothenic Acid (Vitamin B5) 
AI for adults 
Men         19 - 65 years   5 mg/day 
Women   19 - 65 years   5 mg/day 
AI for elderly 
Men         > 65 years  5 mg/day 
Women   > 65 years   5 mg/day 
Pregnancy and Lactation 
D-A-CH  (2013) and Afssa (2001) considered the AI set for adults to be sufficient to cover the 
period of pregnancy. WHO /FAO (2004) and IOM (1998 ) noted some  evidence of lower whole 
blood pantothenic acid concentrations in pregnant women compa red to non-pregnant women, 
although no differences in urinary excretion were observed and average intakes were found to 
exceed excretion (Song et al., 1985). The IOM (1998) set an AI of 6 mg/day based on observed 
average intakes in pregnant women (Song et al., 1985) and rounding up. 
During pregnancy, there is a study done which found that the blood pantothenate 
concentrations in pregnant wom en are significantly lower, but there is no difference in urinary 
excretion in pregnant wom en compared with non-pregnant wome n. Hence, the AI set by the IOM 
(199 8) is 6 mg/day since there is absence of information that is usual intakes in the United States 
and Canada is insufficient to support a healthy pregnancy outcome . Meanw hile, the AI for adults 
also applies to pregnant women (EFSA, 2014). 
According to IO M (1998), there is no evidence that pantothenic acid intakes are inadequate 
to support function during lactation. How ever, consider that the loss of 1.7 mg/day through human 
milk and lower maternal blood concentrations corresponding to intakes of about 5 to 6 mg/day, 
the AI of 7 mg/day of pantothenic acid is being set. This value is the same as proposed by EFSA 
(2014) for lactating wom en, an AI of 7 mg/day is proposed, to compensate for pantothenic acid 
losses through breast milk. WHO/F AO  (2004), Afssa (2001) and IOM (1998) proposed an AI of 7 
m g/day for lactating women,  to compensa te for losses through breast milk. D-A-CH  (2013) 
considered the AI set for adults to be sufficient to cover the period of lactation. 
RNI for 
Pregnancy              6 mg/day 
Lactation                7 mg/day 
168 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pantothenic Acid (Vitam in B5) 
Discussions on revised RNI for M alaysia 
There were no recomme ndations for pantothenic acid in the previous version of the 
Malaysian RNI (2005). The proposed recomme nded intakes for the revised recomm ended intakes 
for Malaysia 2017 are same as those adopted by WHO/FAO (2004). The recommenda tion levels 
of pantothenic acid by WHO/F AO (2004) are also almost similar to the Adequate Intake (AI) values 
of IOM (1998). The recom mendations of EFSA (2014), which is the latest report published, are 
also similar to those of these two organisations for most age groups, except for infants and young 
children. The recommendati ons in EFSA (2 014) are higher for infants and young children 
com pared with those of WHO/ FAO (2004) and IOM (1998). 
8.8 Tolerable upper intake level 
A Tolerable Upp er Intake Level (UL) for pantothenic acid could not be derived but evidence 
available from clinical studies using high doses of pantothenic acid (up to 2 g/day) indicates that 
intakes considerably in excess of observed levels of intake from all sources do not represent a 
health risk for the general population (SCF, 2002). 
A study by Gene ral Practitioner Research Group (1980) involved patients who were treated 
with various dosage of calcium pantothen ate for eight weeks , starting with 500 mg/day in the 
first two days, then 1g/day for the next three days. After that, 1.5 g/day of calcium pantothenate 
are given for the following four days and 2 g/day from day 10 until the end of the trial. This study 
reported that there is no side effect of the treatment given, and there is evidence of beneficial 
effect on pain and disability in rheumatoid arthritis patients. 
8.9 Research recommendations 
The following priority areas of research are recommended: 
1. Research on pantothenic acid biomarkers that could be used to characterise the adequacy 
of pantothenic acid status. 
2. To determine pantothenic acid content in food sources. 
169 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pantothenic Acid (Vitamin B5) 
8.10 References 
Afssa (French F ood Safety Agency ) (2001). Recom mended  nutritional intakes for the French 
population. Editions Tec & Doc, Paris, France pp.605. 
Afssa (French Foo d Safety Agency), (2009). National Individual Food Consum ption Study 2 (INCA 
2) (2006-2007). Report pp.228 
Anses / CIQUA L (National Agency for Food, Environmental and Workplace Health Safety / Food 
Quality Information Center) (2012). French food composition table version 2012. 
Butte NF, Lopez-Alarcon MG & G arza C (2002). Nutrient adequacy of exclusive breastfeeding for 
429 the term infant during the first six months of life. Wo rld Health Organization pp. 57 
Ch ernikevich IP , Dorofeev BF, Mo_seenok AG  (1992). Possible ways of regulating detoxifying 
processes in the alcohol dehydrogenase reaction with pantothenic acid derivatives. Problems 
of Medical Chemistry 39(2): 38-40. 
D-A-CH  (German  Society of Nutrition - Austrian Society of Nutrition - Swiss Society of Nutrition 
Research - Swiss Association for Nu trition) (2013). Reference values for nutrient supply. 
New  Review Buchverlag, Frankfurt/ Main, Germa ny pp.292 
DG E (Ger m an Society of Nutrition) (2012). Nutritional report. pp.432 
D ietary Reference Intakes for Japanese (2015). Minister of Health, Labour and Welfare, Japan 
EFSA  (2014). Scientific Opinion on Dietary Reference Values for pantothenic acid. EFSA Panel on 
Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies. EFSA Journal 12(2): 3581 
Eissenstat BR, Wyse BW  & Hansen RG  (1986). Pantothenic acid status of adolescents. Am J Clin 
Nu tr 44: 931-937 
Fox HM  & Linkswiler H (1961). Pantothenic acid excretion on three levels of intake. Journal of 
Nu trition 75: 451-454. 
Fry PC, Fox HM  & Tao HG (1976). Metabolic response to a pantothenic acid deficient diet in 469 
hum ans. Journal of Nutritional Science & Vitaminology 22: 339-346. 
F SA  (Food Standards Agency) (2002). McC ance and W iddowson’s The C omp osition of Foods 
integrated dataset. 
G eneral Practitioner Research Group (1980). Calcium pantothenate in arthritic conditions. The 
Practitioner 224: 208-211. 
Go nzalez-Lopez, J., Aliaga, L., Gonzalez-Martinez, A., & Martinez-Toledo, M.V. (2016). Pantothenic 
Acid. Industrial Biotechnology of Vitamins, Biopigments, and Antioxidants. 
170 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pantothenic Acid (Vitam in B5) 
Horvath Z & Vecsei L (2009 ). Cu rrent medical aspects of pantethine. Ideggyogyaszati Szemle 
62(7-8), 220-229. 
IOM (1998). Pantothenic acid. In: Dietary references Intakes for Thiamine , Riboflavin, Niacin, 
Vitamin B6, Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic acid, Biotin and Choline. Food and N utrition 
Bo ard, Institute of Medicine. National Academy Press, Was hington DC; 10: 382-398. 
Kathman JV & Kies C (1984). Pantothenic acid status of free living adolescent and young adults. 
Nu trition Research 4: 245-250. 
Kobayashi D, Kusama M, Onda M & Nakahata N (2011). The effect of pantothenic acid deficiency 
on keratinocyte proliferation and the synthesis of keratinocyte growth factor and collagen in 
fibroblasts. Journal Of Pharm acological Sciences 115(2): 230-4. 
Kom ar VI (1990). The use of pantothenic acid preparations in treating patients with viral hepatitis 
A. Therapeutically Archive 63(11): 58-60. 
M inistry of Health, Labour and Welfare (2015). Dietary Reference Intakes for Japanese. 
Prasad PD, Wang H, Huang W, Fei YJ, Leibach FH, Devoe LD & Ga napathy V (199 9). Molecular 
and functional characterization of the intestinal Na+-dependent m ultivitam in transporter. 
Archives of Biochem istry and Biophysics 366(1): 95-106. 
Said HM , Ortiz A, McC loud E, Dyer D, Moyer MP & Rubin S (1998 ). Biotin uptake by human 
colonic epithelial NCM460 cells: A carrier-mediated process shared with pantothenic acid. 
Am erican Journal of Physiology-Cell Physiology 275(5): C1365-C1371. 
Sampedro A, Rodriguez-Granger J, Ceballos J & Aliaga L (2015). Pantothenic acid: an overview 
focused on medical aspects. European Scientific Journal 11(21). 
SCF (Scientific Com mittee on Food) (2002). Opinion of the Scientific Committee on Food on the 
538 Tolerable Upper Intake Level of pantothenic acid. SCF/CS/NUT/UPPLEV/61 Final, pp.6 
Schmidt V (1951). The excretion of pantothenic acid in the urine in young and old individuals. 
Journal of Gerontology 6: 132-134. 
Smith CM  & Song WO (1996). Comparative nutrition of pantothenic acid. Journal of Nutritional 
Biochemistry 7(6): 312-321. 
So ng WO , Wyse BW & Hansen RG (1985). Pantothenic acid status of pregn ant and lactating 
wom en. J Am Diet Assoc 85: 192-198. 
Srinivasan V, Christensen N, Wyse BW & Hansen RG (1981). Pantothenic acid nutritional status 
in the elderly institutionalized and non-institutionalized. Am J Clin Nutr 34(9):1736-42. 
Stein ED & Diamond JM (1989 ). Do dietary levels of pantothenic acid regulate its intestinal uptake 
in mice? The Journal of Nutrition 119: 1973-1983. 
171 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pantothenic Acid (Vitamin B5) 
Tarr JB, Tamura T & Stokstad EL (1981). Availability of vitamin B6 and pantothenate in an average 
Amer ican diet in man. Am J Clini Nutr 34(7): 1328-1337. 
Trumbo P R (2014). Pantothenic acid. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler 
TR, eds. Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins pp.351-357. 
Weim ann & Hermann. (1999). Studies on wound healing: effects of calcium D-pantothenate on 
the mig ration, proliferation and protein synthesis of human dermal fibroblasts in culture. 
International Journal for Vitamin and Nutrition Research 69(2): 113-119. 
WH O/FAO  (2004). Thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, vitamin B6, pantothenic acid and biotin. In : Vitamin 
and Mineral Requirements in Human Nutrition, Se cond Edition. 200-202. 
172 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pantothenic Acid (Vitam in B5) 
M alaysia (2017 ) 
Age group AI (m g/day) 
W HO/FA0 (2004) IOM  (1998) E FSA (2014) 
Appendix 8.1 C om parison of recom m ended nutrient intake for Pantothenic Acid: RNI M alaysia (2017 ), AI of W HO/FAO (2004), AI of IOM  (1998) and AI of 
E FSA (2014) 
Age group AI (m g/day) Age group AI (m g/day) Age group AI (m g/day) 
Infants 
0 - 5 m onths 1.7 0 - 6 m onths 1.7 
6 - 11 m onths 1.8 7 - 12 m onths 1.8 7 - 12 m onths 1.8 7 - 11 m onths 3
C hildren 
1 - 3 years 2 1 - 3 years 2 1 - 3 years 2 1 - 3 years 4
4 - 6 years 3 4 - 6 years 3 4 - 8 years 3 4 - 10 years 4
7 - 9  years 4 7 - 9  years 4
Adolescent 
Boys Boys 
10 - 18 years 5 10 -18 years 5 9  - 13 years 4 11 - 17 years 5
14 - 18 years 5
G irls G irls 
10 - 18 years 5 10 - 18 years 5 9  - 13 years 4 > 18 years 5
14 - 18 years 5
Adult and elderly 
M en M en M en M en 
19  - 65 years 5 ≥ 19  years 5 19  - 30 years 5 ≥ 19  years 5
> 65 years 5 31 - 50 years 5
51 - 70 years 5
>70 years 5
173 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pantothenic Acid (Vitamin B5) 
M alaysia (2017 ) 
Age group AI (m g/day) 
W HO/FA0 (2004) IOM  (1998) E FSA (2014) 
Age group AI (m g/day) Age group AI (m g/day) Age group AI (m g/day) 
W om en W om en W om en W om en 
19  - 65 years 5 ≥ 19  years 5 19  - 30 years 5 ≥ 19  years 5
> 65 years 5 31 - 50 years 5
51 - 70 years 5
> 70 years 5
Pregnancy 
6 6 14 - 18 years 6 5
19  - 30 years 6
31 - 50 years 6
Lactation 
7 7 14 - 18 years 7 7
19  - 30 years 7
31 - 50 years 7
174 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
9 • Pyridoxine (Vitamin B6) 
9.1 Introduction 
Vitamin B6 or pyridoxine is used to generically describe vitame rs that include the alcohol 
pyridoxine, the aldehyde pyridoxal, the amine pyridoxamine, and their 5’-phosphates. It is a water- 
soluble vitamin, stable in acid and unstable in alkali. The metabolically active form is pyridoxal 5’- 
pho sphate (PLP). Plasma PLP  concentration is the biomarker of status used to derive 
recom me ndations for vitamin B6. Vitamin B6 is ingested mo stly in the pyridoxine and 
phosphorylated forms from plant foods and in the pyridoxam ine and pyridoxal forms  in animal 
foods. Ingested phosphorylated forms are dephosphorylated in the intestinal mucosa.  
9.2 Functions 
Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) is involved in amino acid metabolism. Transamination of amino 
acids into oxo (keto) acids requires PLP dependent enzymes to produce non-essential amino 
acids.  PLP  is also involved as a cofactor in the decarboxylation of amino acids to yield amines. 
Amines that are dependent on PLP include histamine, dopamine (which is then further converted 
into noradrenaline and adrenaline, also known as norepinephrine and epinephrine), serotonin and 
GAB A ( γ-aminobutyric acid) and phosphatidylethanolamine.  
Many enzymes are PLP dependent because they are needed to transform amino acids into 
other resources.  For example, kynureninase is a PLP dependent enzyme, which is involved in the 
biosynthesis of niacin (vitamin B3) from trytophan (Rios-Avila et al., 2013). Another example is 
5-aminolevulinate synthase, which is the precursor in haem synthesis (Ferreira & Gong, 1995). 
It is also a coenzyme in the synthesis of sphingoid bases, which are involved in signal 
transmission and cell recognition.  
In the muscle, PLP functions as a coenzyme of glycogen phosphorylase. The phosphate 
group of PLP donates a proton to an inorganic phosphate molecule, which sets off a chain of 
deprotonation w hich catalyses the breakdown  of glycogen and results in the formation of glucose- 
1-phosphate.  
Vitamin B6 also acts as a regulator of actions of steroid hormone s (including androgens, 
oestrogens, progesterone, glucocorticoids), calcitrol, retinol and retinoic acid, and the thyroid 
horm ones. PLP releases the hormone-receptor-complex from  tigh t nuclear binding, and 
term inates hormone actions.  
9.3 M etabolism 
Vitam in B6 must be obtained from the diet, as human beings cannot synthesise it.  All forms 
of vitamers except 4-pyridoxic acid (4-PA) and pyritinol can be interconverted.  Ingested Vitamin 
B6 is absorbed as pyridoxal (PL), pyridoxamine (PM) and pyridoxine (PN) by passive diffusion 
in the jejunum, and are converted into pyridoxamine 5’-phosphate (PM P) by pyridoxal kinase. 
PMP  is further converted to pyridoxal 5’-phosphate (PLP) by pyridoxam ine phosphate 
transaminase or pyridoxine 5’-phosphate oxidase.  PLP is the metabolically active form.  
175 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pyridoxine (Vitamin B6) 
Pyridoxine 5’-phosphate oxidase is dependent on riboflavin-5’-phosphate (also known  as 
flavin mononucleotide, FMN ) as a cofactor, which is produced from  riboflavin (vitamin  B2) 
(McC ormick, 1989).  Therefore dietary vitamin B6 is not available for absorption w ithout vitamin 
B2 in this pathway. 
The liver is the primary site of metabolism for the B6 vitame rs. Most absorbed vitamin B6 
is transported to the liver in their unphosphorylated forms. From the liver, PLP is released into 
the plasma , as a PLP -albumin com plex. From the plasma, tissues and erythrocytes transport 
nonphosphor ylated forms and convert them to PLP , where it could then bind with proteins. The 
protein binding allows for accumulation and retention in tissues, where it is found prima rily in the 
mitochondria and cytosol. For uptake into extrahepatic tissues, the phosphate is hydrolysed by 
extracellular alkaline phosphotase, then retained intracellularly by phosphorylation. The muscle 
stores most of the body’s vitamin B6.  
De spite high dietary intakes of B6, PLP accumu lation in tissues is limited by this capacity for 
protein binding.  Wh en this capacity is exceeded, free PLP is rapidly depho sphorylated. In the liver, 
free pyridoxal is irreversibly oxidized to 4-pyridoxic acid, w hich is then released to be excreted 
via urine. If very large doses of vitamin B6 are consumed, other forms of the vitamin may also 
be found excreted in the urine. Vitamin B6 is also excreted in the faeces as a product of excess 
B6 intake and microbial synthesis of B6 in the lower gut. 
The IOM (199 8) reviewed the literatures available on possible interaction between increased 
protein intake and reduction in vitamin B6 status as indicated by various biom arkers, and 
concluded that the decrease in plasma PLP resulted from  induction of PLP-dependent enzymes 
possibly leading to retention of PLP in the tissue.  
9.4 Sources 
Vitamin B6 is available in a wide variety of foods particularly in meat, fish, poultry, organ 
me ats, enriched cereal products, fortified soy-based meat substitutes, beans, lentils and bananas. 
Pyridoxamine and pyridoxal forms of vitamin B6 in foods of animal origin have a bioavailability 
of about 75% (Roth-Maier, Kettler & Kirchgessner, 2002) to almo st 100% in some  foods 
(Reynolds, 1998). 
Most  M alaysians consum e rice and bread. It is important to note that brown rice 
(Lebiedzinska & Szefer, 2006) and bread made with whole-wheat flour (Batifoulier et al., 2006) 
contain about double the pyridoxine concentration compared to polished rice and white bread. 
Plant foods have vitamin B6 in glycosylated form, which reduces its bioavailability (Reynolds, 
1998; Hansen, Leklem & Miller, 1996). Waldmann and colleagues (2005) recomme nd that vegans 
and vegetarians should include foods with a high bioavailability of pyridoxine, such as beans, 
lentils and bananas.  
How ever, Golden (2009) reported that the glycosylated form constitutes 20% of pyridoxine 
in rice, 28% in wheat, and 15% to 57% in beans, which if ingested could reduce the availability 
of free pyridoxine from other sources. A significant increase in faecal excretion of total vitamin 
B6 w as observed in women who were prescribed a high pyridoxine glucoside diet compared to 
their excretion when they were receiving a low pyridoxine glucoside diet in a crossover trial 
176 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pyridoxine (Vitamin B6 ) 
(Hansen et al., 1996). The increase in faecal excretion during the high pyridoxine glucoside diet 
was accompanied by decreases in total plasma vitamin B6 and PL P levels, which indicates 
reduced absorption of vitam in B6 and/ or increased synthesis by intestinal microflora.  Processing 
of soy-products reduced its pyridoxine concentration (Lebiedzinska & Szefer, 2006); therefore 
vegans and vegetarians should include fortified versions in their diet.  
There is wide variation in the B vitam in content of cooked foods as such items are susceptible 
to cooking losses, particularly w hen liquids in which food is cooked are not consum ed (IO M, 
1998).  The losses may vary from  0% to about 40% (Golden, 2009). A comparison of vitamin B6 
content is given in Table 9.1. 
Table 9.1: Pyridoxine (vitamin B6) content of foods 
Food m g per 100g 
Poultry, meats, fish, legumes 
Ve getarian fillets* 1.5 
Tuna, yellowfin, fresh, cooked 1.0 
Beef, variety meats and byproducts, liver, pan fried 1.0 
Tempeh, cooked 0.2 
Lentils, mature seeds, boiled without salt 0.2 
Egg, chicken, whole, poached 0.1 
Fruits 
Banana 0.4 
Jackfruit (nangka) 0.3 
Durian 0.3 
Raisins, seedless 0.2 
Vegetables 
Shallots 0.3 
Taro (keledek), cooked, without salt 0.3 
Potatoes, without skin, boiled, without salt 0.3 
Spinach, boiled, drained, without salt 0.2 
Capsicum 0.2 
Cereals and grains 
Oat cereal, instant, fortified, plain, prepared with water 0.3 
Whea t cereal, RTE, puffed, fortified 0.2 
Milk and dairy products 
Milk, whole 0.04 
Yoghur t, plain, whole milk 0.03 
*Vegetarian fillets are meat-free products made from soy derived textured vegetable proteins or fungi derived or 
other plant origin materials.  
Source: USDA, 2015 
177 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pyridoxine (Vitamin B6) 
9.5 D eficiencies 
Deficiency is rare because the amount of vitamin B6 absorbed exceeds physiological needs, 
except in individuals with autoimm une disorders that cause inflammation, coeliac disease, 
individuals with impaired renal functions probably due to increased metabolic clearance of 
pyridoxal 5’-phosphate, and individuals with chronic alcohol dependency because pyridoxal 5’- 
phsop hate loses out in com petition with alcohol acetaldeh ydes. Wh en it occurs, vitamin  B6 
deficiency is a ssociated with m icrocytic hypochromic (sid eroblastic) a naemia, 
electroencephalographic abnorm alities, dermatitis with cheilosis, naso-lateral seborrhoea, 
glossitis, depression and confusion, weakened immune function, and peripheral neu ropathy 
(epiletic form convulsions in infants) (FA O /WHO, 2001; IOM, 1998). Electroencephalographic 
abnormalities have been observed in young non-pregnant women in controlled depletion studies 
w ith experimental diets consisting less than 0.06 mg/day of vitamin B6 (Kretsch, Sauberlich & 
Newbrun, 1991), which was reversed with administration of 0.5 mg/day vitamin B6.  
Moderate vitamin B6 deficiency results in abnorm alities of amino acid metabolism because 
they are depende nt on PLP as a coenzym e. These include im pairm ent of conversion of tryptophan 
to niacin, and methionine to cysteine. The conversion of trytophan to nicotinic acid is interrupted, 
w hich leads to accumulation of hydroxykynurenine and xanthurenic acid. Xanthurenic acid is then 
detectable in urine after an oral trytophan load. Deprivation of vitamin B6 also deprives 
gluconeogenesis of its PLP-dependent transaminases and glycogen phosphorylase, which results 
in imp aired glucose tolerance.  Vitamin B6 deficiency is also associated with increased sensitivity 
of tissues to steroid hormone actions.  
Vitamin B6 status can be determined by various markers. The most  commonly  mea sured 
marker is fasting plasma PLP , which is a good biomarker for PLP content in the liver (Chiang et 
al., 2005).  PLP is positively associated to vitam in B6 intake and changes in intake are reflected 
in the biomarker within 1 to 2 weeks (Ueland et al., 2015). However other factors not related to 
vitamin B6 status affect plasma PLP  concentration: diabetes (Ueland et al., 2015), album in 
concentration, alkaline phosphatase activity and alcohol consumption (Brussaard et al., 1997). 
Another marker is activation of erythrocyte aspartate aminotransferase ( α-EAST) and alanine 
aminotransferase ( α-EALT) by PLP , which are used as a marker for long-term vitamin B6 status. 
Their large variation in values limits their usefulness as biomarkers of status (Raica & Sauberlich, 
1964).  
The prevalence of vitamin B6 deficiency in Malaysia is uncertain because its biomarker of 
status has not been measured. Among Malaysian wome n of reproductive age, median intake was 
1.0 mg/d (5th to 95th percentile: 0.4 - 2.6 mg/d); biomarkers of vitamin B6 were not measured 
(Khor et al., 2005). The lack of data on prevalence of deficiency in lactating women and therefore 
infants globally can also be attributable to lack of reported studies (Allen, 2012). 
9.6 Factors affecting pyridoxine requirements 
Factors to be considered when estimating the pyridoxine requirement include the 
bioavailability of vitamin B6 (Reynolds, 1998; Roth-Maier et al., 2002), genetic variability of grains 
(Batifoulier et al., 2006), nutrient - nutrient interactions (IOM , 199 8), processing and cooking 
procedures, drug interactions (IOM, 1998), and disease state of individuals (IOM, 1998). Age is 
178 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pyridoxine (Vitamin B6 ) 
associated with decrease in plasma concentration of vitamin B6. It is not known whether this 
decrease in the elderly reflects an inadequate intake, a greater requirement, or change s in tissue 
distribution and metabolism of the vitamin with increasing age.  
9.7 Setting requirements and recommended intake of pyridoxine 
There had been no recommendat ions for pyridoxine in the previous Malaysian RNI of 2005. 
In sourcing of references to establish RNI for B6 for Malaysian RNI  2017, the Technical Sub 
C ommit tee (TSC) for Vitamins noted that there are no studies on the requirement for this vitamin 
am ong the local population. Biochemical studies of the status of the vitamin is also scarce in the 
country. The TSC reviewed the rationale and approaches adopted by three international scientific 
organisations, name ly WHO/FA O (2004), IOM (1998) and EFSA (2016).  The TSC decided to base 
their recommen dations for Malaysian RNI 2017 for pyridoxine on WH O/F AO  (2004) as those 
values were derived from carefully considered larger body of studies.  The TSC decided not to base 
their recomme ndations according to recommendations by EF SA (2016) as they were derived 
from studies with small sam ple sizes, comp rising mostly of Europeans. The TSC for Vitamins 
felt that small randomised controlled studies were not adequate to revise recomme nded values. 
Infants 
An adequate intake (AI) was used by the IO M  DRI  Com m ittee to estimate vitam in B6 
requirement s for infants. The AI is based on the observed mean intake of dietary vitamin B6 for 
healthy exclusively breastfed infants for the first 6 months and B6 concentration of milk produced 
by well-nourished mothers. The AI for infants 0 through 6 months of age is derived by using 780 
m l as the average volume of milk per day and 0.13mg/L (West & Kirksey, 1976) as the average 
B6 concentration. The requirement thus calculated is 0.1 mg/day.  
For older infants, the DRI C ommi ttee used the reference body weight ratio me thod to 
extrapolate from the AI for B6 for infants ages 0 - 6 months. The AI for this group of infants was 
thus calculated to be 0.2 mg/day after rounding. The Committee also extrapolated from the 
Estimated Average Requirement (EAR) for adults and after adjusting for expected variance, gave 
an AI for B6 of 0.4 mg/day. The Comm ittee also reviewed data obtained from several controlled 
studies that measured B6 intake and assessed infant status. These data we re found to support 
the estimated AI of 0.3 mg/day of B6 for older infants as the mean obtained from  the two methods 
of extrapolation (IOM, 1998). 
The WH O /FAO (2004) recommends a RNI of 0.1 mg/day for infants 0 through 6 months of 
age, and 0.3 mg/day for older infants. The EFSA (2016) Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies 
(NDA) Panel recommends an AI of 0.3 mg/day for infants aged 7 - 11 months.  
RN I for infants 
0 - 5 months    0.1 mg/day 
6 - 11 months 0.3 mg/day 
179 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pyridoxine (Vitamin B6) 
Formulas for full-term infants studied showed those samples provide higher levels of vitamin B6 
than does human milk (Young, Eitenmiller & Soliman, 1998) and formula fed full-term infants have 
higher plasma pyridoxal 5’-phosphate (PLP) concentrations than full-term infants fed with huma n 
milk (Borschel et al., 1986). 
Children and adolescents 
For older children, the recommended intakes were estimated from maintenance needs with 
respect to body w eight and extrapolating from adult values (IO M , 1998).  The AI for children was 
estima ted to range from 0.5 - 0.6 mg per day.  The AI for adolescents was estimated to range from 
1.0 to 1.3 mg per day.  It was assumed that total needs for m ales and fem ales do not differ 
substantially until age 14 years, when reference weights differ. The WH O /FAO  (2004) recom me nds 
the same amounts for children aged 1 to 9 years, 1.3 mg/day for adolescent boys aged 10 to 18 
years, and 1.2 mg/day for adolescent girls aged 10 to 18 years. The EFSA NDA Panel (2016) sets 
an Average Requirement between 0.5 - 1.2 mg/day for children aged 1 - 14 years of both sexes. 
For adolescents aged 15 - 17 years, the EFSA NDA Panel derives their Average Requirement as 
similar to adults.  
The IO M  (1998) method of estimating EAR and RDA w as used to determine EAR (RDA) for 
children and adolescents; boys aged 7 - 12 years: 0.84 (1.01) mg/d and girls aged 7 - 12 years: 
0.75 (0.89) mg/d (Chang et al., 2002); boys aged 13 - 15 years: 1.07 (1.28) mg/d and girls aged 
13 - 15 years: 0.90 (1.08) mg/d (Chang, Hsiao & Hsuen, 2003).  The RDA for boys aged 16 - 18 
years is suggested to be 1.1 mg/d and girls 1.0 mg/d (Chang et al., 2007).  
Wh en treating malnourished children, it is recommended that pyridoxine requirements be set 
at 1.8mg/1,000 kcal for a fortified food approach, 0.8 g/1,000 kcal for mixed diets, and 1 mg /1,000 
kcal if the diet contains milled whole cereals (Golden, 2009).  
RNI for children 
1 - 3 years 0.5 mg/day 
4 - 6 years 0.6 mg/day 
7 - 9 years 1.0 mg/day 
RNI for adolescents 
Boys 10 - 18 years 1.3 mg/day 
Girls 10 - 18 years 1.2 mg/day 
Adults and elderly 
The IOM (1998 ) used mostly depletion - repletion studies to estimate EAR for adults and the 
elderly, and assum ed a coefficient of variation (CV) of 10 percent because of unavailability of 
standard deviation of the requirement for vitamin B6.  A plasma PLP level of 20 nm ol/L was used 
as the criteria for sufficiency for setting the EAR (Bailey et al., 1999; IOM, 1998; Liu et al., 1985). 
180 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pyridoxine (Vitamin B6 ) 
The RDA is then defined as twice the CV, therefore the RDA is 120 percent of the EAR. Based on 
these studies, the RDAs  for the elderly is higher than those for adults (Selhub et al., 1993; Ribaya- 
M ercado et al., 1991).  The WH O /FAO (2004) recommends 1.3 mg/day for men and women aged 
19 to 50 years, 1.7 mg/day for men above 50 years, and 1.5 mg/d for women above 50 years.  
The EF SA ND A Panel (2016) considers the Average Requiremen ts and Population Reference 
Intakes (PRIs) from the vitamin B6 intake required to maintain me an concentration of plasm a 
PLP above 30 nmo l/L from several intervention studies on 44 young wom en. The EFS A NDA 
Panel sets the AR for all adult women at 1.3 mg/day and PRI at 1.6 mg/day. In the absence of 
similar data for men, the EFSA NDA Panel sets the AR for all adult me n at 1.5 mg/day and PRI at 
1.7 mg/day, using allomet ric scaling from the AR of women and taking into account the difference 
in reference body weight. 
Low plasm a vitamin levels have been associated with cognitive decline in the elderly (van de 
Rest et al., 2012).  In the elderly, supplem entation with vitamin B6, B12 and/or folic acid may 
normalise homocysteine levels, but have not been shown to clearly impr ove or slow  cognitive 
decline (Krause & Roupas, 2015). An earlier Cochrane review of two randomise d control trials 
concluded that vitamin B6 had no overall effects on cognition or mood (Malouf & Grimley, 2003). 
The IOM  (1998) noted that 1 mg/day is sufficient for most adults because clinical sym ptoms 
of B6 deficiency have been reported only in controlled studies with very low levels of B6 during 
the depletion experimen tal diet.  Individuals with very high protein diets may require higher levels 
of vitamin B6. There is an Evidence Level IIA suggestion from a depletion - repletion study that 
non -pregnant young wom en consuming a high-protein diet (1.55g/kg body weight) should 
consum e 1.94 mg/d of vitamin B6 (Huang et al., 1998). Kretsch et al. (19 9 5) suggested in a 
depletion study (Evidence Level IB) that a RDA of 0.020 mg/g protein for vitamin B6 be used for 
young non-pregnant women on a high protein diet (1.55 g /kg body weight). 
There is an Evidence Level IB suggestion that the EAR should be revised to 1.2mg/d and the 
RD A should be 1.7 mg/day for young women (H ansen et al., 2001). There is an Evidence Level 
III study, which suggests RDA values of 1.6 mg/d for men and 1.5 mg/d for women aged 17 - 25 
years (Cho & Kim, 2004).  
RN I for adults 
Men      19 - 50 years 1.3 mg/day 
Women 19 - 50 years 1.3 mg/day 
Men       51 - 59 years 1.7 mg/day 
Women 51 - 59 years 1.5 mg/day 
RN I for elderly 
Men      60 - 65 years 1.7 mg/day 
Women 60 - 65 years 1.5 mg/day 
Men      > 65 years 1.7 mg/day 
Women > 65 years 1.5 mg/day 
181 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pyridoxine (Vitamin B6) 
Pregnancy and Lactation 
The IO M  (1998) recommends RD As of 1.9 mg/day for pregnant women and 2.0 mg/day for 
lactating women. The increased recommendations are based on average estimated accretion by 
the placenta and foetus, and increased demands of about 0.25 mg/day WHO/F AO (2004); IOM, 
1998). Cons equently both the WH O/FAO  and IOM recomm end an increase of 0.5 mg/day of 
vitamin B6 to reasonably meet the need in the third trimester of pregnancy. The EFSA ND A Panel 
(2016) recomme nds an increase of 0.2m g/day for pregnant wome n, and sets an AR of 1.5 mg/day 
and PRI  of 1.8 mg/day. For lactating women, the EFSA NDA Panel estima tes an additional intake 
of 0.133 mg/day, and sets an AR  of 1.4 mg/day and PRI of 1.7 mg/day. The EFSA recomm endation 
is based on vitamin B6 bioavailability from a mixed diet (75%). 
The vitamin B6 intake of mothers is a strong predictor of infant status (Allen, 2012; Kang- 
Y oon et al., 1992 ).  Mothers receiving higher levels of vitamin B6 suppleme nts post-natal in the 
form  of daily PN.HCl produced breast milk with higher levels of vitamin B6 content (Chang & 
Kirksey, 1990; Borschel, Kirksey & Hannerman, 1986). Chang and Kirksey (1990) reported that 
PLP concentrations in infant cord blood, and maternal plasm a, vitam in B6 concentration in 
colostrum were positively correlated with vitamin B6 supplem entation during pregnancy. 
Consequen tly the WH O/FAO  (2004) and IOM (1998) recommend an increase of 0.6 mg/day of 
vitamin B6 for lactation. The IOM  (199 8) recomme nds the EAR of 1.1 mg/day to ensure that 
breast milk contains 0.13 mg/L of vitamin B6. A C ochrane review  concluded that there were few 
trials and inadequate evidence to demonstrate clinical benefits of vitamin B6 supplem entation 
during pregnancy (Salam, Zuberi & Bhutta, 2015).  
RNI for 
Pregnancy 1.9 mg/day 
Lactation 2.0 mg/day 
D iscussion on revised RNI for Malaysia 
The recomme ndations for vitamin B6 in Malaysian RNI 2017 are similar to WHO/FA O (2004) 
as well as those in the IOM  (1998) recommendat ions. The recom m endations for adolescents and 
adults are lowe r than values recom mended by EFSA (2 016). O n the other hand, the 
recomm endations during pregnancy and lactation are slightly higher than those of EFSA (2016). 
9.8 Tolerable upper intake levels 
The IOM  (1998) reported no adverse effects from  high  intake of vitamin B6 from food 
sources.  Large oral doses of supplemental pyridoxine used to treat medical conditions have been 
associated with sensory neuropathy and derm atological lesions (Cohen  & Bendich, 1986). 
Schaum burg et al. (1983) reported sensory neuropathy at dosages of 2,000 to 6,000 mg/day of 
pyridoxine for 2 to 40 months. Friedman, Resnick & Baer (1986) reported dermatological lesions 
after consumption of 2 to 4 g/day of pyridoxine for more than 1 year. The WHO/FA O (2004) adopts 
a Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) of 100 mg/day of pyridoxine, which was proposed by the 
IO M  (1998). The European Union adopts a UL of 25 mg/day (SCF , 2000), and the UK adopts a UL 
of 10 mg/day (EVM, 2003). 
182 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pyridoxine (Vitamin B6 ) 
There are hom eopathic remedies  that suggest vitamin B6 intake of 100 to 500 mg/d, 
including being used to treat morning sickness during pregnancy (M asino & Kahle, 2002). Given 
the UL , such actions should be viewed with caution despite very little evidence of reported adverse 
side effects (Simpson et al. 2010; Shrim et al. 2006). There is inadequate evidence on adverse 
effects from intakes of pyridoxine of 100 to 200 mg/day and the duration of intake at these levels 
(Renwick, 2006). The tolerable upper intake for vitamin B6 for various age groups as proposed 
by IOM  (1998) is given in Table 9.2. 
Table 9.2: Total Upper Intake (UL) levels of vitamin B6 for various age 
mg/d of vitamin B6 
Infants 0 - 5 month ND 
6 - 11 month ND 
C hildren and adolescents 1 - 3 y 30 
4 - 8 y 40 
9 - 13 y 60 
M :14 - 18 y 80 
F:14 - 18 y 80 
Adults M:19 - 50 y 100 
F:19 - 50 y 100 
M :51 - 59 y 100 
F:51 - 59 y 100 
Elderly M:60 - 65 y 100 
F:60 - 65 y 100 
M :>65 y 100 
F:>65 y 100 
Pregnancy 100 
Lactation 100 
ND: Not possible to establish 
Source: IOM (1998) 
183 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pyridoxine (Vitamin B6) 
9.9 Research recommendations 
The following priority areas of research are recommended: 
• Data on dietary intake of vitamin  B6 among commun ity groups, particularly children and 
women, in terms of dietary B6 and supplemental B6. 
• C ontent of vitamin B6 and pyridoxine glycoside in a variety of foods available in the market 
to improve the food composition tables. 
• Plasma vitam in B6, plasma pyridoxal phosphate (PLP), urinary 4-pyridoxic acid (4-PA) 
concentrations, erythrocyte alanine aminotransferase activity coefficient ( α-EALT), aspartate 
am inotransferase activity coefficient ( α-EAST), which are biomarkers for vitamin B6 status. 
• Vitamin B6 concentration in breast milk of lactating Malaysian wom en and their dietary 
vitamin B6 intake and supplementation levels. 
• Bioavailability and loss of vitamin B6 from cooking process. 
184 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pyridoxine (Vitamin B6 ) 
9.10 References 
Allen LH (2012).  B Vitam ins in breast milk: relative importance of maternal status and intake, and 
effects on infant status and function. Adv Nutr 3: 362-369. 
Bailey AL, Wright AJA & Southon S (1999). Pyridoxal-5-phosphate determ ination in human 
plasma by high performance liquid chromatography: How appropriate are cut-off values for 
vitamin B6 deficiency? Eur J Clin Nutr 53(6): 448-455. 
Batifoulier F, Verny MA, Ch anliaud E, Rém ésy C & Demigné C (2006).  Variability of B vitamin 
concentrations in wheat grain, milling fractions and bread products. Europ J Agronom y 25: 
163-169. 
Borschel MW, Kirksey A & Hannem ann RE (1986).  Effects of vitamin B6 intake on nutriture and 
grow th of young infants. Am J Clin Nutr 43: 7-15. 
Brussaard JH, Löwik MR, van den Berg H, Brants HA & Bemelmans W (1997).  Dietary and other 
determinants of vitamin B6 parameters. Eur J Clin Nutr : 51(Suppl. 3):S39-S45. 
Chang SJ & Kirksey A (1990).  Pyridoxine supplementation of lactating mo thers: relation to 
ma ternal nutrition status and vitamin B-6 concentrations in milk. Am  J Clin Nutr 51:826-831. 
Chang SJ, Hsiao LJ & Hsuen S Y (2003). Assessment of vitamin B-6 Estimated Average 
Requirem ent and Recom mended  Dietary Allowance for adolescents aged 13 - 15 years using 
vitamin B-6 intake, nutritional status and anthropometry. J Nutr 133: 3191-3194. 
Ch ang SJ, Hsiao LJ, Lee YC & Hs uen SY (2007). Vitamin B6 status assessment in relation to 
dietary intake in high school students aged 16 - 18 years. Brit J Nutr 97: 764 -769. 
Chang S J, Huang YC, H siao LJ, Lee Y C & Hsuen SY (2002). Determ ination of vitamin B-6 
Estimated Average Requirement and Recomm ended Dietary Allowance for Children aged 7 
- 12 years using vitamin B-6 intake, nutritional status and anthropometr y. J Nutr 132: 3130- 
3134. 
C hiang EP , Smith DE, Selhub J, Dallal G, Wang YC & Roubenoff R (2005). Inflammation causes 
tissue-specific depletion of vitamin B6. Arthritis Res Ther 133:1056-1059. 
C ho YO  & Kim BY  (2004). Evaluation of vitamin B6 status and RDA in young Koreans. Ann Nutr 
Metab 48(4): 235-240. 
Co hen M & Bendich A (1986). Safety of pyridoxine - a review of huma n and animal studies. 
Toxicol Lett 34: 129-139. 
EFS A (2016).  Scientific opinion on Dietary Reference Values for vitamin B6. EFSA Pan el on 
Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies. EFSA Journal 14(6):4485, 79pp. 
EVM (2003). Safe upper levels for vitamins and minerals. Expert Grou p on Vitamins and Minerals. 
London: Food Standards Agency of the United Kingdom. 
185 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pyridoxine (Vitamin B6) 
F erreira GC & Gong  J (1995).  5-Aminolevulinate synthase and the first step of hem e biosynthesis. 
J Bioenerg Biomembr 27(2):151-159. 
Friedm an MA, Resn ick JS & Baer RL (1986). Subepidermal vesicular dermatosis and sensory 
peripheral neuropathy caused by pyridoxine abuse. J Am Acad Dermatol 14:915-917. 
G olden M H (2009). Proposed recommend ed nutrient densities for moderately malnourished 
children. Food Nutr Bull 30(3):S267-S342. 
Hansen C M , Leklem JE & Miller LT (1996). Vitamin B-6 status indicators decrease in w ome n 
consum ing a diet high in pyridoxine glucosidase. J Nutr 126:2512-2518. 
H ansen CM, Shultz TD, Kwak HK, Memon S & Leklem JE (2001). Assessment  of vitam in B-6 
status in young women consumi ng a controlled diet containing four levels of Vitamin B-6 
provides an Estimated Average Requireme nt and Re comme nded Dietary Allowance. J Nutr 
131: 1777-1786. 
H uang YC, Chen W , Evans MA, Mitchell ME & Shultz TD (1998). Vitamin B-6 requirement and 
status assessment of young women fed a high-protein diet with various levels of vitamin B- 
6. Am  J Clin Nutr 67: 208-220. 
IO M  (1998). Dietary Reference Intakes for thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, vitamin B6, folate, vitamin 
B1 2, pantothenic acid, biotin, and choline. A report of the Standing Com m ittee on the 
Scientific Evaluation of Dietary Reference Intakes and its Panel on Folate, other B vitamins, 
and choline and Subcommi tte on Upper Reference Levels of Nutrients. Food and Nutrition 
Board. National Academy Press, Washington DC . 
Kang-Yo on SA, Kirksey A, Giacoia G & West K (1992).  Vitamin B-6 status of breast-fed neonates: 
influence of pyridoxine supplementation on mothe rs and neonates. Am J Clin Nutr 56:548- 
558.  
Khor GL, Duraisamy G, Loh SP , Green TJ & Skeaff CM (2005). Dietary and blood folate status of 
Malaysian women of childbearing age. Asia Pac J Clin Nu tr 15(3):341-349. 
Krause D & Roupas P (2015). Effect of vitamin intake on cognitive decline in older adults: 
evaluation of the evidence. J Nutr Health Aging 19(7): 745-753. 
Kretsch MJ, Sauberlich H E & Newbrun E (1991). Electroenceph alographic change s and 
periodontal status during short-term vitamin B-6 depletion of young, nonpregnant women. 
Am J Clin Nutr 53: 1266-1274.  
Kretsch MJ, Sauberlich HE, Skala JH & Johnson HL (1995). Vitamin B-6 requirement and status 
assessment: young women fed a depletion diet followed by a plant- or animal-protein diet 
with graded amounts of vitamin B-6. Am J Clin Nutr 61: 2091-1101. 
Lebiedzinska A & Szefer P (2006). Vitamins B in grain and cereal-grain food, soy-products and 
seeds. Food Chem 95:116-122. 
186 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pyridoxine (Vitamin B6 ) 
Liu A, Lumeng L, Aronoff GR & Li TK (1985).  Relationship between body store of vitamin B6 and 
plasma pyridoxal-P clearance: metabolic balance studies in huma ns. J Lab Clin Med 106: 
491-497. 
M alouf R & Grimley Evans J (2003).  The effecto of vitamin B6 on cognition. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev 4:C D004393. 
M asino SA & Kahle JS (2002). Vitamin B6 therapy during childbearing years: cause for caution? 
Nu tr Neuroscience 5(4): 241-242. 
M cCormick DB (1989). Two interconnected B vitamins: riboflavin and pyridoxine. Physiol Revs 
69:1170-98. 
Raica N Jr & Sauberlich HE (1964). Blood cell transaminase activity in huma n vitamin B6 
deficiency. Am J Clin Nutr 15:67-72. 
Renw ick AG (2006). Toxicology of micronutrients: adverse effects and uncertainty. J Nutr 136: 
493S-501S. 
Reynolds RD (1998). Bioavailability of vitamin B6 from plant foods. Am J Clin Nutr 48:863-867. 
Ribaya-Mercado JD, Russell RM, Sahyoun N, Morrow FD & Gers hoff SN (199 1). Vitamin B6 
requirem ents of elderly men and women. J Nutr 121: 1062-1074. 
Rios-Avila L, Nijhout HF, Reed MC, Sitren HS & Gregory JF III (2013). A mathematical model of 
tryptophan metabolism via the kynurenine pathway provides insights into the effects of 
vitamin B-6 deficiency, tryptophan loading, and induction of tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase on 
tryptophan metabolites. J Nutr 143(9): 1509-1519. 
Roth-Maier DA, Kettler SI & Kirchgessner M (2002). Availability of vitam in B6 from  different food 
sources.  Int J Food Sci Nutr 53: 171-179. 
Salam RA, Zuberi NF & Bhutta ZA (2015). Pyridoxine (vitamin B6) supplem entation during 
pregnancy or labour for maternal and neonatal outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2015(6): Art. No.: CD000179. DOI: 10.1002/14651858. CD000179.pub3. 
SCF . Scientific Committee on Food (2000). Opinion of the Scientific Committee on Food on the 
tolerable upper intake level of vitamin B6. Brussels: European Commis sion.  Available from: 
http://europa.eu.int/comm/food/sc/scf/out80c_en.pdf 
Sch aum burg H, Kaplan J, Win debank A, Vick N, Rasmu s S, Pleasure D & Brow n MJ (1983). 
Sensory neuropathy from pyridoxine abuse. N Engl J Med 309: 445-448. 
Selhub J, Jacques PF, Wilson PWE, Rush D & Rosenberg IH (1993). Vitamin status and intake as 
prim ary determinants of hom o-cysteinemia in an elderly population. JAMA 270: 2693-2698. 
187 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pyridoxine (Vitamin B6) 
Shrim A, Boskovic R, Maltepe C, Navios Y, Garcia-Bournissen F & Koren G (2006). Pregnancy 
outocme follow ing use of large doses of vitamin B6 in the first trimester. J O bstet Gynaecol 
26: 749-751. 
Sim pson JL, Bailey LB, Pietrzik K, Shane B & Holzgreve W (2010). Micronutrients and w omen of 
reproductive potential: required dietary intake and consequences of dietary deficiency or 
excess. Part I - folate, vitamin B12, vitamin B6. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 23(12):1323- 
1343. 
U eland PM, Ulvik A, Rios-Avila L, Midttun Ø & Grego ry JF (2015). Direct and functional 
biomarkers of vitamin B6 status. Ann Rev Nutr 35:4.1-4.38. 
U SD A (2015). National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference, Release 28.  US Department 
of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Nutrient Data Laboratory. Accessed from 
http://www.ars.usda.gov/ba/bhnrc/ndl on 26 October 2016 
van de Rest O, van Hooijdonk LWA , Doets E, Schiepers OJG, Eilander A, de Groot L (2012). 
Vitamins and n-3 fatty acids for brain development and function: review of human studies. 
Ann Nutr Metab 60(4): 272-292. 
Waldm ann A, Dörr B, Koschizke JW, Leitzmann C & Hahn A (2005). Dietary intake of vitamin B6 
and concentration of vitamin B6 in blood sam ples of Ger ma n vegans. Public Health N utr 
9(6):779-784. 
We st KD & Kirksey A (1976). Influence of vitamin B6 intake on the content of the vitam in in hum an 
milk. Am J Clin Nutr 29:961-969.  
W H O /FAO  (2004). Vitamin and mineral requirements in huma n nutrition. 2nd ed. 
Y oung ER, Eitenmiller RR & Soliman AM (1998). Vitamin B6 and protein content of infant formulas 
manufactured in the United States.  J Food Compos Anal 1:259-264. 
188 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pyridoxine (Vitamin B6 ) 
M alaysia (2017 ) 
Age group RNI (m g/d) 
W HO/FAO (2004) IOM  (1998) E FSA (2016) 
Appendix 9.1:  C om parison of recom m ended intake for Pyridoxine (Vitam in B6): RNI M alaysia (2017 ), W HO/FAO (2004), IOM  (1998), and E FSA (2016) 
Age group RNI (m g/d) Age group RNI (m g/d) Age group RNI (m g/d) 
Infants Infants Infants Infants 
0 - 5 m onths 0.1 0 - 6 m onths 0.1 0 - 6 m onths 0.1* 0 - 6 m onths -
6 - 11 m onths 0.3 7 - 12 m onths 0.3 7 - 12 m onths 0.3* 7 - 11 m onths 0.3 (AI) 
C hildren C hildren C hildren C hildren 
1 - 3 years 0.5 1 - 3 years 0.5 1 - 3 years 0.5 1 - 3 years 0.6 
4 - 6 years 0.6 4 - 6 years 0.6 4 - 8 years 0.6 4 - 6 years 0.7 
7 - 9  years 1.0 7 - 9  years 1.0 7 - 10 years 1.0 
Boys Boys Boys Boys 
10 - 18 years 1.3 10 - 18 years 1.3 9  - 13 years 1.0 11 - 14 years 1.4 
14 - 18 years 1.3 15 - 17 years 1.7 
G irls G irls G irls G irls 
10 - 18 years 1.2 10 - 18 years 1.2 9  - 13 years 1.0 11 - 14 years 1.4 
14 - 18 years 1.2 15 - 17 years 1.6 
M en M en M en M en 
19  - 50 years 1.3 19  - 50 years 1.3 19  - 50 years 1.3 ≥18 years 1.7 
51 - 65 years 1.7 ≥51 years 1.7 ≥51 years 1.7 
> 65 years 1.7 
189 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Pyridoxine (Vitamin B6) 
M alaysia (2017 ) 
Age group RNI (m g/d) 
W HO/FAO (2004) IOM  (1998) E FSA (2016) 
Age group RNI (m g/d) Age group RNI (m g/d) Age group RNI (m g/d) 
W om en W om en W om en W om en 
19  - 50 years 1.3 19  - 50 years 1.3 19  - 50 years 1.3 ≥18 years 1.6 
51 - 65 years 1.5 ≥51 years 1.5 ≥51 years 1.5 
> 65 years 1.5 
Pregnancy 1.9 Pregnancy 1.9 Pregnancy Pregnancy 1.8 
14 - 18 years 1.9 
19  - 30 years 1.9 
31 - 50 years 1.9 
Lactation 2.0 Lactation 2.0 Lactation Lactation 1.7 
14 - 18 years 2.0 
19  - 30 years 2.0 
31 - 50 years 2.0 
* The IO M  gives these values as Adequate Intakes (AI), w hich is the m ean intake in healthy breastfed infants. O ther values are given as RDAs. The RDA is a 
value for average daily dietary intake level, w hich is sufficient to m eet the nutrient requirem ents of 9 7–9 8 percent of the healthy individuals in a group, w hich 
in turn is calculated from  the Estim ated Average Requirem ent (EAR). The EAR is the value for the average daily nutrient intake level estim ated to m eet the 
requirem ents of half of the healthy individuals in a group. 
190 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
10 • Folate (Vitamin B9) 
10.1 Introduction 
Fo late, also know n as vitamin B9, consists of a 2-amino-4-hydroxy-pteridine (pterin) 
group conjugated by a me thylene group to p-amino benzoic acid, wh ich is linked to one or 
more glutamic acid residues. The active form  of folate is known as 5-methyltetrahydrofolate (5- 
MTH F). Folic acid is a synthetic form of folate which is found in supplements  and fortified food 
products, such as flour and breakfast cereals. 
10.2 Functions 
Folate plays an important role in hematopoiesis and the production of red blood cells. 
Folic acid functions as coenzymes in single-carbon transfer in the metabolism of nucleic and 
amino acids. The DNA and methylation cycles both regenerate tetrahydrofolate (one form of 
folate). However, there is a considerable amount of catabolism  of folate and a small loss of 
folate occurs via excretion from the urine, skin, and bile. Therefore, there is a need to replenish 
the body’s folate content from the diet.  
10.3 Metabolism 
Folate is metabolised by intestinal cells to produce 5-MTHF . This 5-MTHF is the most 
common form that is found in plasma and serum. Folic acid is biotransformed in the intestinal 
absorptive mucosa and transferred to the hepatic portal vein as 5-MTHF  in the same way as 
dietary folates. Food folates are hydrolysed to monoglutamate forms in the gut to allow their 
absorption across the intestine. The monoglutamates enter the portal circulation and are 
met abolised to polyglutamate derivatives in the liver. They are either retained, or released to the 
blood as reconverted monoglutama tes or to bile. The liver contains about 50% of the body 
stores of folate. 
Intracellular pools of reduced tetrahydrofolates serve as cofactors in several metabolic 
processes. Folate is present in serum either free or bound to other carrier proteins like the 
folate-binding protein or other serum protein like albumin. Serum folates exist mostly in the 
mo noglutamate form, which is the form that can be readily transported across cell membranes. 
Once outside cells, folate is converted to polyglutam ate forms by addition of several glutamic 
acid residues by folylpolyglutama te systhetase. This leads to retention of folate pools inside 
the cells for subsequent m etabolism. The bulk of excretion products are folate cleavage 
products. Intact urinary folate accounts for only a small percentage of dietary folate. Biliary 
excretion of folate can be as high as 100 µg/day, however much of this is reabsorbed. 
10.4 Sources 
Fo late is available in a wide variety of foods but in relatively low concentrations.  Howeve r, 
it is particularly abundant in legum es, while green leafy vegetables are outstanding sources. 
Diets that contain adequate amounts of fresh green vegetables (>3 servings per day) are good 
folate sources.  Fortified grain products also contribute to folate intake.  Meat, poultry, seafood, 
eggs, and dairy products have small amounts of folate. Liver is high in folate content but is 
191 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Folate (Vitamin B9 ) 
also high in cholesterol; it is often recomm ended to reduce its intake. Folate losses occur during 
harvesting, storage, distribution and cooking. Table 10.1 shows food sources of folate in 
M alaysian foods (Chew et al., 2012). 
The bioavailability of natural folate is affected by the remov al of the polyglutamate chain 
by the intestinal conjugase. This process is apparently not comp lete, thereby reducing the 
bioavailability of natural folate by as much as 25-30 percent. In contrast, synthetic folic acid 
appe ars to have a bioavailability of close to 100 percent. The low bioavailability and, more 
importantly, the poor chemical stability of the natural folate have a profound influence on the 
development of nutrient recommendations (Gr egory III, 2001). F ood fortification can provide 
significant amounts of folic acid to the diet (Crider et al., 2011). In the Un ited States adult 
population from  198 8 to 1994 (before cereal grains we re fortified with folate), the reported 
m edian intake of folate from food was approximately 250 (g/day, but this value underestimates 
current intake. After the fortification of cereal grains w ith folate, the average intake of folate is 
expected to increase by about 80 to 100 (g/day for w omen and by more for me n (IOM, 1998). 
Table 10.1 Folate content of foods 
Source of folate µm g/100 g 
C ereal and cereal products 
C ornflakes* 156 
Breakfast cereal* 155 
Rice, brow n (Beras perang) 45 
Rice, parboiled 26 
Rice, basmathi 25 
Rice, broken (Beras hancur) 18 
Bread, white (Roti putih) 18 
Rice, uncooked 16 
Fruits 
Papaya 31 
Sapodilla (Ciku) 30 
Kiwi fruit 29 
Or ange 24 
Soursop (Durian belanda) 19 
Honeydew  (Tembikai susu) 9
M ango 4
Legumes and legume products 
Baked bean, canned 27 
Soya bean milk, unsweetened 23 
Soya bean curd, sheet/film (fucok) 13 
Soya bean cake, fermented (tempeh) 10 
192 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Folate (Vitamin B9) 
Source of folate µg/100 g 
Soya bean curd, fried 10 
Vegetables 
Vietnamese mint (kesom) 10 
Pump kin 8
Sw eet potato shoots (pucuk ubi keledek) 6
Tapioca shoots 6
Source: Chew  et al. (2012);* indicates the food has been fortified with folate. 
10.5 Deficiencies 
Nutritional deficiency of folate is common among people consuming an inadequate diet 
of legum es and folate-rich vegetables and fruits. This can be exacerbated by ma labsorption 
conditions, including celiac disease and tropical sprue. Pregnant wom en are at risk of folate 
deficiency because pregnancy significantly increases folate requirement, especially during 
periods of rapid foetal growth (second and third trimester). Folate deficiency during pregnancy 
can results in neural tube defects (NTD). Losses of folate in milk during lactation also increase 
the requirement for lactating mother. 
Inadequate folate intake results in a decrease in serum folate concentration, then 
adecrease in erythrocyte folate concentration. This is followed  by a rise in hom ocysteine 
concentration and megalablastic changes in the bone marrow and other tissues with rapidly 
dividing cells. Macrocytic anaemia finally results. If there is inadequate dietary folate, the activity 
of both the DNA  and the methylation cycles will be reduced, thus, reducing cell division 
(particularly the red blood cell) and resulting in anaemia. Other cells derived from  bone marrow 
also decrease, leading to leucopenia and thrombocytopenia. There is also a reduction in cell 
division in the lining in the gut that may result in an increased susceptibility to infection, a 
decrease in blood coagulation and secondary malabsorption. The decrease in the methylation 
cycle will also result in an elevation in plasma homocysteine which has been associated with 
the aetiology of cardiovascular disease. Vitamin B12 and vitamin B6 are also required for the 
met hylation cycle. Interruption of the methylation cycle resulting from  impaired folate status or 
decreased vitam in B12 or vitamin  B6 may have serious long-term risk such as neuropathy. 
Symptoms of folate deficiency include weakness, fatigue, difficulty in concentrating, irritability, 
headache, palpitations, shortness of breath and atrophic glossitis.  
There is increasing interest in homocysteine and folic acid. Plasma homo cysteine 
concentration, even if only moderately elevated, is an independe nt risk factor for cardiovascular 
disease (CVD), stroke, poor cognitive function and osteoporosis.  Even in populations that are 
apparently normal and consuming diets adequate in folate, there is a range of elevated plasma 
homoc ysteine that could be lowered by consuming an extra 100 or 200µg/day folic acid. 
How ever, large scale intervention trials regarding the significance of interrelationships among 
folate levels, plasma homocysteine levels with CVD and other diseases need to be carried out. 
The DRI Comm ittee (IOM , 1998) felt that knowledge currently available on this relationship is 
too weak to be used as the basis for deriving estimated average requireme nt for folate. 
193 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Folate (Vitamin B9 ) 
EF SA (2014) considered that red blood cell folate is the most reliable biomarker of folate 
status. It reflects tissue folate status and can be used as indication for long-term dietary folate 
intake. Folate adequacy is characterized by serum and red blood cell folate concentration of ≥
10 nmol/L and 340 nmol/L, respectively. Serum and red blood cell folate below 6.8 nmol/L and 
317 nm ol/L are catogerised as folate deficiency. Although  total plasma hom ocysteine is a 
sensitive biomarker, it is not a specific biomarker of folate status and function because of the 
influence by various other dietary factors such as selected B-vitamins, choline, betaine and 
alcohol consumption. 
There is only a limited num ber of studies on folic acid intake or deficiency in the country. 
In a study of nutritional anaemia among 309 pregnant wome n of low er socio-econom ic strata 
in the Maternity H ospital Kuala Lum pur, serum  folate w as one of the num erous parameters 
investigated. A high prevalence of 61% of low serum folate levels (<3 ng folate per ml serum) 
w as reported and the highest prevalence was amongst Indian women (77.3%) (Tee et al., 1984). 
In a study conducted by Khor et al. (2006) involving 39 9 M alaysian wo men of 
childbearing age (140 Malay, 131 Chinese and 128 Indian), the median intake of folate was 
202.4 µg (59.4-49 1.8 µg), which only achieved 50.6%  of the Malaysian Recomm ended Nutrient 
Intakes level. In terms of folate deficiency, 15.1% of the Malaysian subjects showed plasma 
folate deficiency (<6.8 nmol/L), with the highest prevalence among Indians (21.5%) (Khor et 
al., 2006). According to Khor et al. (2006), Chinese had significantly higher red blood cell folate 
levels than the Malays and Indians. F olate content is reduced in prolonged cooking, and the 
C hinese style of cooking usually entails quick stir-frying of leafy green vegetables and legumes. 
M alays and Indians, however, prefer their vegetables to be well-cooked. 
In another study comparing red blood cell folate levels in three Asian cities, Green et al. 
(2007) found out that red blood cell folate levels were the highest in women from Jakarta (872 
nm ol/L), followed by Kuala Lumpur (674 nmol/L) and the lowest in Beijing (563 nmol/L). The 
predicted neural tube defects were the highest in Beijing (30/10000), followe d by Kuala Lumpur 
(24/10000) and the lowest in Jakarta (15/10000). The plausible explanation for higher folate 
status in women in Jakarta is the implem entation of mandatory folic acid fortification in 2001 
of local and imported wheat (200 µg/100 g of wheat). Neither Malaysia nor China had a 
m andatory folic acid fortification scheme (Green et al. 2007). 
10.6 Factors affecting folate requirements 
Factors to be considered whe n estimating the folate requiremen t include the 
bioavailability of folic acid and food folate, nutrient-nutrient interactions, interactions with other 
food componen ts, smoking, folate-drug interactions and genetic variations. These have been 
thorough ly reviewed in IOM (1998) and EFSA (2014). 
D ietary Folate Equivalents 
F olic acid recom m endation is expressed as dietary folate equivalents (DF E), which are units 
that account for the differences in the absorption of food folate and of synthetic folic acid 
obtained from dietary supplements or food fortified with folic acid. When synthetic folic acid is 
consum ed as a supplement without food, it is nearly 100% bioavailable. In contrast, when folic 
194 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Folate (Vitamin B9) 
acid is consum ed with food, as it is always the case with fortified cereal-grain products, its 
absorption is reduced by a small percentage. Its estimated bioavailability is approximately 85% . 
Naturally occurring food folate is less well absorbed by the body than is synthetic folic acid. The 
best estimate of the bioavailability of food folate is provided by data from the study of Gibson 
(2007). Thus, folic acid taken when a person is fasting is 2 times (100/50) more  bioavailable 
than food folate, and folic acid taken with food (which includes folic acid added to food during 
fortification) is 1.7 times (85/50) more bioavailable than food folate. Thus, if a mixture of 
synthetic folic acid plus food folate is consumed, dietary folate equivalents (DFE) to determine 
the EAR can be calculated as follows: 
µg of DFE provided = [µg of food folate + (1.7 x µg of synthetic folic acid)] 
DFE may be expressed in different ways, depending on the type of conversion needed (Suitor 
and Bailey 2000): 
1 µg DFE =1.0 µg food folate = 0.6 (g folic acid added to foods = 0.5 µg folic acid taken without 
food. 
1 µg folic acid as a fortificant = 1.7 µg DFE 
1 µg folic acid as a supplement, fasting = 2.0 µg DFE. 
Thus, 100 µg folate from a serving of cooked spinach equals to 100 µg DF E, but 100 µg folic 
acid from a serving of fortified ready-to-eat cereal equals 170 µg DFE , and 100 µg supplemental 
folic acid taken without food equals to 200 µg DFE. 
Interactions with nutrients 
Coexisting iron or vitamin B12 deficiency may interfere with the diagnosis of folate 
deficiency.  Iron deficiency leads to a decrease in mean cell volume, wher eas, folate deficiency 
results in the opposite direction. Therefore, in combined deficiency, interpretation of 
haematological changes may be unclear. A vitamin B12 deficiency results in the same 
haematological changes that occur with folate deficiency because the vitamin B12 deficiency 
results in a secondary folate deficiency (IOM, 1998). 
Certain forms  of fibre (e.g. wheat bran) may decrease the bioavailability of certain forms 
of folate under some conditions but many forms  of fibre appear to have no adverse effects. 
Alcohol intake may result in folate deficiency by impairing intestinal folate absorption and 
hepatobiliary metabolism and by increasing renal folate excretion (Gregor y III, 2001). 
195 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Folate (Vitamin B9 ) 
10.7 Setting requirements and recommended intake of folate 
The Malaysian RNI 2005 had included folate in the list of recom me nded vitam ins. In 
establishing folate recommendation, the main references used by the Technical Sub-Committee 
(TSC ) on Vitamins w ere the WHO/F AO (2004) consultation report and the IOM (1998) DRI 
recom men dations. The rationale and steps taken in setting requirements and the levels 
recomm ended by these organisations were considered. There we re no local studies on folate 
requiremen ts of commu nities that the TSC on Vitamins could use as a reference. There are also 
very few reports of the biochem ical status of the vitamin amongst the population groups.  
The WHO /FAO (2004) Expert Consultation took note of the work of the DRI Committee 
of IOM (1998) which had exhaustively review ed the evidence of folate intake, status, and health 
for all age groups and also reviewed the literature on the extra requirements during pregnancy 
and lactation. This review led to calculations of an EAR and a subseque nt estimation of RDA to 
the EAR plus 2 standard deviations. The Expert Consultation agreed with the approach taken and 
the RDAs published and adopted these recommended intakes as the WHO/F AO RNI for folate. 
The RNI used food folate as the source of dietary folate because most societies in developing 
countries consume folate from naturally occurring sources.  
The TSC on Vitamins decided to adopt the WHO/F AO (2004) folate recomme ndations as 
the RNI 2005 for Malaysia. 
In the current review of the Malaysian RNI 2017, the TSC  on Vitamins again referred to 
the W HO/F AO (2004) consultation report and the IOM  (199 8) recom m endations and noted that 
there were no updated recomm ended intakes for folate by these organisations. In searching 
for recom mend ations by other international scientific organisations, the TSC referred to the 
publication of EFSA (2014). 
In setting up the dietary recom mended values (DR V) for folate, EFSA (2014) had 
considered serum and red blood cell folate concentrations as suitable primary criteria for 
deriving the DRV for European in all age groups. An Adequate Intake (AI) for infants aged from 
7 - 11 months and pregnant wom en, and both Average Requiremen t (AR) and Population 
Reference Intake (PR I) for aged groups from  1 to ≥ 15 years and lactation wom an. AR was 
estimated from  the folate intake required to maintain folate adequacy. PRI was calculated by 
assuming a coefficient of variation (CV) of 15% to account for the additional variability 
associated with the higher requirem ent for folate in individual with the methylene- 
tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) 677TT genotype. 
The latest reference from EFSA (2014) is more  related to European countries, and is not 
appropriate to be directly adopted for the revised RNI.  RNI 2017 for folate shall be retained as 
RNI 2005. The reason is because based on the local study by Khor et al. (2006), the median 
intake of folate am ong  Malaysian wome n achieved only 50% of the Malaysian RNI 2005. In 
addition, researchers have reported that excessive consumption of folate may increase the risk 
of cancer and cardiovascular disease (Sauer et al., 2010). A study in China has shown that 
supplem entation of folic acid in the first trimester increased the risk of gestational diabetes 
am ong pregnant wom en (BMI > 25 kg/m 2 before pregnant). The TSC  had decided to maintain 
the RNI 2017 to be the same as RNI 2005.  
196 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Folate (Vitamin B9) 
The TSC on Vitamins decided to adapt the WHO/FAO  (2004) values as the revised RNI 2017 for 
Malaysia. These recommen dations whic h are therefore sim ilar to the RN I 20 05 
recom mendations, are given in bold in the following paragraphs according to age groups and 
summar ised in Appendix 10.1. 
Infants 
An adequate intake (AI) was used by the DRI C ommittee to estimate folate requirements 
for infants. This is also the quantity of dietary folate that maintains blood folate concentration 
comparable with those of the infant exclusively fed human milk. The AI for infants 0 through 6 
months of age is derived by using 780 ml as the average volume of milk per day and 85 µg/l as 
the average folate concentration. The requirement thus calculated is 65 µg per day, after 
rounding up. Because this is food folate, the amount is the same in dietary folate equivalents 
(DEF). 
EF SA (2014) concluded that due to limitations of available data on folate intake and status 
in infants, an AI was set based on the extrapolation from  the intake of folate in fully breast-fed 
infants (0 - 6 months) which folate deficiency has not been observed. The panel had decided 
not to set an AR and a PRI for folate for this age group (7 - 11 months). 
For older infants, the DRI Commi ttee used the reference body weight ratio method to 
extrapolate from the adequate intake for folate for infants ages 0 - 6 months. The adequate 
intake for this group of infants was thus calculated to be 80 µg per day. The Commit tee also 
reviewe d data obtained from several controlled studies that measured folate intake and assessed 
the infant’s status. These data were found to support the estimated AI of 65 µg per day of folate 
for young infants and of 80 µg per day for older infants. 
The FAO /WH O Con sultation m ade slight adjustmen ts to these recomme ndations and 
established a RNI of 80 µg folate per day for both groups of infants. 
RN I for infants 
0 - 5 months    80 µg/day DFE 
6 - 11 months 80 µg/day DFE 
Children and adolescents 
No data were found to assist in establishing estimated requireme nts for children. Hence 
the EAR s for these ages have been extrapolated from adult values. The same approach was 
used to establish the EAR for adolescents. The RDAs were then calculated as 120% of the EAR, 
assuming a coefficient of variation (CV) of 10% (IOM, 1998).  
EFS A (2014) found no reliable data of folate for children and adolescents to set AR for 
these age groups. AR for folate for adults (250 µg DFE/day) was used to set AR for children and 
adolescents in all age groups because no indication the requireme nt differs by sex and age. 
197 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Folate (Vitamin B9 ) 
Therefore, AR was calculated by extrapolation from the AR of adults. Allometric scaling was 
used on the assumption that folate requirement is related to metabolically active body mass: 
AR child = AR adults x (Weight child / Weight adults ) 0.75 x (1 + Growth Factor) 
The IO M  1998  recom mended intakes were adopted by FAO/WHO a s the recomme nded 
RNI, after making some adjustments according to age groupings.  
RNI for children 
1 - 3 years 160 µg/day DFE 
4 - 6 years 200 µg/day DFE 
7 - 9 years 300 µg/day DFE 
RNI for adolescents 
Boys 10 - 18 years 400 µg/day DFE 
G irls 10 - 18 years 400 µg/day DFE 
Adults and elderly 
The main approach to determining the EAR for adults uses a com bination of erythrocyte 
folate, plasma homocystein and plasma or serum folate. The focus used was on the adequacy 
of specific quantities of folate consum ed under controlled me tabolic conditions to maintain 
normal blood concentrations of these indicators. Intakes either as food or as food plus folic acid 
related to these indicators w ere comp uted to derive Dietary Folate Equivalents (DFEs). Four 
studies were considered by the IOM DR I Committee and the reports of Sauberlich et al. (1987) 
and O’Keefe et al. (1995) were given the most weight. The findings indicated an EAR of 320 
µg/day of DFEs. This figure is well supported by data from epidemiological studies. Assuming 
a CV of 10%, RDA for folate was com puted as 120% of the estimated requirement or 400 µg/day 
of DFE. In addition, IOM (1998) also made a special recomme ndation for wome n capable of 
becom ing pregnant to reduce risk to neural tube defect. 
IO M (1998) reviewed data from metabolic folate status assessme nt and epidemiological 
studies and concluded that EAR (and hence RDA) for adult ages 51 years and older was 
expected to be the same for younger adults. It was felt that the aging process does not appear 
to impair folate absorption or utilisation. 
198 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Folate (Vitamin B9) 
RN I for adults 
Men 19 - 65 years 400 µg/day of DFE 
Women 19 - 65 years 400 µg/day of DFE 
RN I for elderly 
Men > 65 years 400 µg/day of DFE 
Women > 65 years 400 µg/day of DFE 
Pregnancy and lactation 
Folate requirem ents increase during pregnancy due to the significant acceleration in 
single-carbon transfer reactions, including those required for synthesis of nucleotide and thus 
division of cells. The maintenance of erythrocyte folate, which reflects tissue stores, w as 
selected as the primary indicator of adequacy in pregnant wome n. EFS A (2014) noted that there 
is no evidence available to assess folate requirem ents in pregnancy compared to non-pregnant 
adults. For setting up an average requiremen t for pregnancy is not possible. Therefore, an 
adequate intake for folate for pregnant women at 600 µg DF E/day is set (EFS A, 2014). IOM 
(19 9 8) reviewed various available studies including population-based studies relating folic acid 
consumption and maintenance of normal folate concentration in erythrocytes, serum, or both; 
controlled supplementation studies; and controlled metabolic studies. 
It w as observed that low dietary folate intake plus 100 µg of supplem ental folate 
(equivalent to approximately 200 µg/day of DFEs) was inadequate to maintain normal folate 
status in pregnancy.  Therefore, the EAR was derived by adding 200 µg/day of DFE to the EAR 
for non-pregnant wom en (320 µg/day) to provide an EAR of 520 µg/day. RDA  was next 
computed as 120% of the EAR or 600 µg/day of DFE. 
A lactating wom an would require an additional intake of folate to com pen sate folate 
losses during exclusively breast-feeding. In setting up an average requireme nt for folate for 
lactation w omen, EFSA (2014) has considered the volume and folate content of milk transfer 
over the first 6 months post partum, and the bioavailability of dietary folate. Therefore, an 
additional intake of 130 µg DFE/day of folate to the average requirement of non-lactation w oma n 
(250 DFE/day) is required. Howe ver, in Malaysia there is no available data of folate requirements 
in lactating woman . 
The IO M (199 8) has estimated that the EAR for lactating women (450 µg/day) is the 
folate intake necessary to replace the folate secreted daily in human milk (133 µg/day) plus the 
amount required by the non-lactating women to maintain folate status (320 µg/day). Wome n 
who are only partially breastfeeding would need less.  RDA was then computed as 120% of the 
EAR  or 500 µg/day of DFE. These RDAs were adopted by the FA O/WHO Cons ultation as RNI for 
these two groups of women. 
199 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Folate (Vitamin B9 ) 
RNI for: 
Pregnancy 600 µg/day of DFE 
Lactation 500 µg/day of DFE 
D iscussions on revised RNI for Malaysia 
The RNI  2017 values for folate for Malaysia, adapted from W HO /FAO (2004), are also the 
same as those adopted by the Working Group for the Harmonisation of RDAs in SEA (Tee & 
Florentino, 2005). Appendix 9.1 provides a summary of these revised RNI, compared with the 
previous Ma laysian RD A of 2005, the W HO/ FAO (2 004) recomm endations, the values 
recomm ended by IOM (1998) as well as the EFSA (2014) recomm endations. 
10.8 Tolerable upper intake level 
Excessive intake of folic acid has been associated with increased cancer risk such as 
colorectal cancer (Cole et al. 2007; Hirsch et al. 2009) and prostate cancer (Figueiredo et al., 
2009). In addition, treatme nt with folic acid was found to increase the cancer outcomes and all- 
cause mortality in patients with ischemic heart disease (Ebbing et al., 2009). The presence of 
unm etabolised folic acid in the blood has also been reported to be associated with decreased 
natural killer cytotoxicity (Troen et al., 2006).  
According to the IOM  (199 8), there is no evidence that consumption of sufficient natural 
dietary folate may pose a risk of toxicity.  How ever, this clearly does not apply to folic acid given 
in supplements or fortified foods. Individuals who are at risk of vitamin B12 deficiency (e.g., 
those who eat no animal foods (vegans) may be at risk of the precipitation of neurological 
disorders if they consum e excess folate. The tolerable upper levels (U L) for various age groups 
as suggested by IOM (1998) are given in Table 10.2. 
200 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Folate (Vitamin B9) 
Table 10.2 Tolerable Upper Level for Folic Acid according to age groups 
Age groups µg/day of folate from  fortified foods or supplements 
Infants Not possible to establish for supplemental folate 
Children 
1 - 3 years 300 
4 - 8 years 400 
9 - 13 years 600 
Adolescents 14 – 18 years 800 
Adult women 1000 
Adult men 1000 
Pregnant women 
14 - 18 years 800 
≥19 years 1000 
Lactation women 
14 - 18 years 800 
≥19 years 1000 
(Source: IOM , 1998) 
201 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Folate (Vitamin B9 ) 
10.9 Research recommendations 
The following priority areas of research are recommend ed: 
• Data on content and bioavailability of natural folate in foods and diets. 
• Determination of folate status and identification of population at high risk of poor folate 
status. 
• Re lationship between folate deficiency and health outcome s such as the incidence of 
neural tube defects, cardiovascular disease, stroke and cognitive function in high risk 
groups including children, adolescents, women of reproductive age and elderly people 
• Effect of long term high folic acid intake on immune function and health\adverse health 
effect. 
• Effect of long term fortified folate food intake on inflammation and cancer. 
202 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Folate (Vitamin B9) 
10.10 References 
Chew  SC, Loh SP & Khor GL. (2012) Determination of folate content in commonly consumed 
Malaysian Foods. Int Food Res J 19(1):189-197. 
Cole BF , Baron JA, Sandler RS, Haile RW, Ahnen DJ, Bresalier RS, McKeo wn -Eyssen G, 
Sum mer s RW , et al. (2007) Folic acid for the prevention of colorectal adenomas:  a 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA 297(21): 2351-2359. 
C rider, K.S., Bailey, L.B & Be rry, R.J. (2011). Folic acid food fortification: its history, effect, 
concerns, and future directions. Nutrients 3(3): 370-384. 
Ebbing M, Bonaa KH, Nygard O, Amesen E, Ueland PM , Nordrehauq JE, Rasmuss en K, Njølstad 
I, Refsum H, Nilsen DW , Tverdal A, Meyer K & Vollset SE. (2009) Cancer incidence and 
mor tality after treatment with folic acid and vitamin B12. JAMA 302 (19):2119-2126. 
EFSA  NDA Panel (EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies), 2014. Scientific 
O pinion on Dietary Reference Values for folate. EFSA Journal 2014; 12(11):3893, 59 pp. 
doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2014.3893 
G ibson, R.S. (2007). The role of diet- and host-related factors in nutrient bioavailability and 
thus in nutrient-based dietary requirement estimates. Fd Nutr Bull 28 (1): S77-S100. 
Gr een TJ, Skeaff CM, Venn BJ, Rockell JE, Todd JM, Khor GL, Loh SP , Duraisamy  G, Muslima tun 
S, Agustina R, Ling X & Xing X. (2007) Re d cell folate and predicted neural tube defect 
rate in three Asian cities. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr 16(2): 269-273. 
Gr egory III, J.F. (2001). Case study: Folate bioavailability. J Nu tr 131(4): 1376S-1382S. 
FAO /WH O  (2002). Folate and folic acid. In: Human Vitamin and Mineral Requirements. Report 
of a Joint FAO/WHO Expert  Consultation. FAO, Rome; p 53-63. 
Figueiredo Grau MV, Haile RW , Sandler RS, Summers RW, Bresalier RS, Burke CA, McKeown- 
Eyssen GE & Baron JA. (2009) Folic acid and risk of prostate cancer: results from a 
randomized clinical trial. J Natl Cancer Inst 101 (6):432-435. 
Hirsch S, Sanchez H, Albala C, de la Maza MP , Barrera G, Leiva L & Bunout D. (2009) Colon 
cancer in Chile before and after the start of the flour fortification program with folic acid. 
Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 21(4):436-439. 
IO M (1998). Folate. In: Dietary References Intakes for Thiamine, R iboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin 
B6, Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin and Choline. Fo od and Nutrition Board, 
Institute of Medicine. National Academy Press, Washington DC ; chapter 8, pp 196-305. 
Khor GL, Duraisamy G, Loh SP & Green T. (2006) Dietary and blood folate status of Malaysian 
women of childbearing age. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr 15(3): 341-349. 
203 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Folate (Vitamin B9 ) 
O ’Keefe CA , Bailey LB, Thomas EA, Hofler SA, Davis BA, Cerda JJ & G regory JF (1995). 
C ontrolled dietary folate affects folate status in nonpregnant women. J Nu tr 
125: 2717-2725. 
Sauer J, Mason JB & Choi SW (2009). Too m uch folate - a risk factor for cancer and 
cardiovascular disease. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 12: 30 -36. 
Tee ES, Kandiah M, Jaffar A, Kandiah V, Mohd. Ru sli Z, Kuladevan R and Zulkafli H (1984). 
Nutritional anemia in pregnancy: A study at the Maternity Hospital, Kuala Lumpur. Mal 
J Reprod Health 2(1):32-50. 
Teoh ST (1975). Recommende d daily dietary intakes for Peninsular Malaysia. Med  J Mal 30: 38- 
42. 
Troen AM, Mitchell B, Sorensen B, Wener MH, Johnston A, Wood B, Selhub J, McTiernan A, 
Y asui Y, Oral E, Potter JD & Ulrich CM . (2006) U nme tabolized folic acid in plasma is 
associated w ith reduced natural killer cell cytotoxicity am ong postmenopausal women. 
J Nu tr 136(1):189-194. 
204 Recom mended Nutrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Folate (Vitamin B9) 
M alaysia (2017 ) 
Age group RNI (µg/day) 
E FSA (2014) FAO/W HO (2002) IOM  (1998) 
Appendix 10.1 C om parison of recom m ended intake for Folate: RNI M alaysia (2017 ), E FSA (2014) RNI of FAO/W HO (2002), AI and RD A of IOM 
(1998) 
Age group D RV (µg/day) Age group RNI (µg/day) Age group AI (µg/day) 
Infants AI Infants Infants 
0 - 5 m onths 80 7 - 11 m onths 80 0 - 6 m onths 80 0 - 6 m onths 65 (9 .4 µg/kg) 
6 - 12 m onths 80 7 - 12 m onths 80 7 - 12 m onths 80 (8.8 µg/kg) 
C hildren AR     PRI C hildren C hildren RD A (µg/day) 
1 - 3 years 160 1 - 3 years 9 0     120 1 - 3 years 160 1 - 3 years 150 
4 - 6 years 200 4 - 6 years 110   140 4 - 6 years 200 4 - 8 years 200 
7 - 9  years 300 7 - 10 years 160   200 7 - 9  years 300 
Boys Boys Boys 
10 - 18 years 400 11 - 14 years 210   270 10 - 18 years 400 9  - 13 years 300 
≥ 15 years 250   330 14 - 18 years 400 
G irls G irls G irls 
10 - 18 years 400 10 - 18 years 400 9  - 13 years 300 
14 - 18 years 400 
205 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Folate (Vitamin B9 ) 
M alaysia (2017 ) 
Age group RNI (µg/day) 
E FSA (2014) FAO/W HO (2002) IOM  (1998) 
Age group D RV (µg/day) Age group RNI (µg/day) Age group AI (µg/day) 
M en M en M en 
19  - 65 years 400 19  - 65 years 400 19  - 30 years 400 
> 65 years 400 > 65 years 400 31 - 50 years 400 
51 - 70 years 400 
> 70 years 400 
W om en W om en W om en 
19  - 65 years 400 19  - 65 years 400 19  - 30 years 400 
> 65 years 400 > 65 years 400 31 - 50 years 400 
51 - 70 years 400 
> 70 years 400 
Pregnancy Pregnancy AI Pregnancy Pregnancy 
600 600 600 14 - 18 years 600 
19  - 30 years 600 
31 - 50 years 600 
Lactation Lactation AR  PRI Lactation Lactation 
500 380 500 500 14 - 18 years 00 
19  - 30 years 500 
31 - 50 years 500 
*Sam e as in RNI 2005 
206 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
11 • Cobalamin (VitaminB12 ) 
11.1 Introduction
Cobalamin,also known asVitamin B12,isawater-solublevitaminthatexistsinseveral 
forms and contains the mineralcobalt.Cobalamin refersto a group of cobalt-containing 
compounds (corrinoids)thatcontainsthesugarribose,phosphate,and abase (5,6-dimethyl 
benzimidazole)attachedtothecorrin ring.Cyanocobalam in isacommon synthetic form ofthe 
cobalaminthatisproduced by chemically modifyingbacterialhydroxocobalaminand used for 
additionto food and food supplements and drugs.Inthebody,cyanocobalaminisconverted 
into the human physiologicalforms methylcobalaminand 5’-deoxyadenosylcobalam in,the 
forms ofcobalaminthatareactivein human metabolism. 
11.2 Functions 
Cobalamin is required for proper red blood cellform ation,neurologicalfunction,and 
DN A synthesis(IOM,1998).Cobalamin playsessentialrolesin folatemetabolism and actsas 
acofactorfor two enzym es,namelyL-methylmalonyl-CoAm utase and methioninesynthase. 
L-methylmalonyl-CoA m utase requires 5’-deoxyadenosylcobalaminas a cofactorto 
catalysetheconversion ofL-methylmalonyl-CoA to succinyl-CoAw hichthen entersthecitric 
acid cycle.Succinyl-CoA plays amajorroleintheproductionofenergyfrom lipids and proteins 
andis alsorequiredforthesynthesis ofhaemoglobin,the oxygen-carrying pigme ntin red blood 
cells(Shane,2000). 
M ethylcobalamin isrequired forthefunctionofthefolate-dependentenzyme, methionine 
synthase. M ethionine synthase is required for the synthesis of the m ethionine and 
tetrahydrofolatefrom hom ocysteine (IOM, 1998). Methionine,in turn,isrequired for the 
synthesisofS-adenosylmethionine (SAM),amethyldonor foralmost100differentsubstrates, 
includingDNA, RNA ,horm ones,proteins,and lipidsaswellasdetoxificationreactions(Shane, 
2000).W ithoutadequatesuppliesofcobalamin and folate,thesynthesisofmethionineand its 
derivative SAM is disrupted, with profound effectson norm alcellular function. W ithout 
met hionine,mye linand neurotransmitters(serotonin,dopam ine,acetylcholine and nor- 
epinephrine)cannotbe produced thatareneeded for neurologicaldevelopment,maintenance 
and functions.Furthermo re,inadequatefunctionof methionine synthase can lead to an 
accum ulation of hom ocysteine,an amino acidthatisrelatedto man y neurodegenerative 
diseasesthatlead to brain dam age and cognitivedisturbances. Thus,the synthesis of 
methioninepreventsthe accumulation ofhomocysteineinthebrain(de Jager,2014).
207 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
C ob alam in(Vitam inB12 ) 
11.3 M etabolism 
N orm ally,cobalamin isattachedto a protein either for transportor storage.In the 
stoma ch,hydrochloric acid and pepsin are secreted to degrade the cobalaminfrom protein 
(IOM ,1998).The releasedcobalamin thenbindstoanotherprotein,R proteinsecretedby the 
salivaryglands andthe gastric mu cosaandtransportsitthrough thestomach andinto thesmall 
intestine.The stomach cells also produce a proteincalledintrinsicfactor (IF),a glycoprotein 
secretedby thestomach’sparietalcellsw hich traveltothesmallintestine. 
In the sm allintestine,the vitamin 12,bound to IFinteractsw iththe proteinreceptor 
know n ascubilin-IF receptor when itis transported from theduode num totheileum. Another 
protein,amnionless,facilitates the attachmentofcubilintotheilealcellm embr ane.The binding 
ofthevitaminB12-IFcomplex tothecubilinreceptorisimportantinorderforthevitamin tobe 
absorbed. Cobalamin is then released and degraded in lysosom es. Cobalamin is finally 
m etabolisedtoitsmethyland deoxyadenosyl-derivatives. 
In plasma,cobalamin isbound tothe cobalamin-bindingproteinstranscobalamin(TC) 
and haptocorrin.TC com bines withcobalamin atthe ilealcellto form holotranscobalamin 
(holoTC)and rapidly deliverscobalam intotissues.The livertakesup approximately50percent 
ofthe cobalamin,and the rem ainder is transported to other tissues.The highestcobalamin 
lossesoccur through thefaeces.Sources offaecalcobalamin includeunabsorbed cobalamin 
from food or bile,desquamated cells,gastric and intestinalsecretions and cobalam in 
synthesized by bacteriainthecolon.There are no know n interactionsofcobalamin withother 
nutrients with regardstoabsorption or excretion. 
11.4 Sources 
Cobalamin isfound only inanimal foods.U nlike other B vitam ins,cobalaminisnota 
norm alconstituentof plantfoods except for certain algae.Cob alam in isnot supplied by 
com mo nly eatenplantfoods unless they have been exposed to bacterialaction thathas 
produ ced cobalamin; contaminated with soil,insects,or other substances thatcontain 
cobalamin;yogurt,tempeh,miso,kimchi,and picklesare allexamples offoods some times 
m adew iththe lacticacidbacteriathatcanproduce vitaminB12 .E xamples ofcobalamincontent 
ofsome foodsareshown inTable11.1.
208 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
C ob alam in(Vitam in B1 2) 
Food µg/100g 
Rice,noodle,bread,cerealsand cerealsproductsand tubers 
Fo rtifiedcereals 20.0 
Fish,poultry and meat 
Clams,cooked 98.9 
Liver(lamb),cooked 85.7 
Liver(beef)cooked 83.1 
Liver(veal),cooked 72.5 
Oysters,cooked 28.8 
Mussels,cooked 24.0 
Liver(chicken,pork),cooked 21.1 
Mackerel,cooked 19.0 
Tuna,bluefin,raw or cooked 10.9 
Salmon,cooked 3.2 
Beef 2.6 
Shrimp,cooked 1.7 
Por k 1.2 
Egg 0.9 
Duck or chicken,cooked 0.3 
Milk and milkproducts 
Tofu 2.4
Parmesan 2.3 
Moz zarella 0.9 
Cheddar 0.8 
YougurtPlain(regular,low fat) 0.8 
Milk,Semi-skim/skim 0.5 
Milk,W hole 0.4 
Others 
Seaweed 2.3 
Tempeh 0.1 
Table 11.1 Cobalamin (Vitamin B12) contentoffoods 
Source: USDA nutrientdatabase(2012) 
209 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
C ob alam in(Vitam inB12 ) 
11.5 Deficiencies 
M egaloblasticanaemiaisthemost frequentclinicalexpressionofcobalamin deficiency, 
w hichaffects red bloodcells and allotherbloodcells.Most ofthecobalamindeficiencyoccurs 
due to cobalaminm alabsorption,ratherthan inadequate dietaryintake.The deficiency results 
in 1) an autoimmune conditioncalled pernicious anemia and 2) food-bound cobalamin 
m alabsorption syndrom e. Impairment of cobalamin absorption can cause m egaloblastic 
anaemiaandneurologic disordersin deficientindividuals.B othconditionshave been associated 
w itha chronicinflammatory disease of the stom ach known as atrophic gastritis.Atrophic 
gastritisis associatedwiththe presenceofautoantibodies directedtowards stomach cellsand 
infectionby the bacteria,H elicobacter pylori(H. pylori)thatdama ge stomach cellsthatm ake 
intrinsicfactor,asubstancethebody needs toabsorb B 12 (Lahner,P ersechinoand Annibale, 
2012).Insufficientdietaryintake is rare in adults living indeveloped countriesbutismo reoften 
reportedin vegans. 
The clinicalsignsofdeficiency include fatigue,w eakness,constipation,lossofappetite, 
and w eightloss(Kapadia,1995).Apartfrom that,neurologicalchanges can also occur inthe 
individualwith cobalamin deficiency such as numbnes s and tingling in the hands and feet, 
difficultywalking,memory loss,disorientation,and dem entia(IOM,1998).Inaninfant,failure 
to thrive,m ovement disorders,developmentaldelays,and me galoblasticanemiaare signsofa 
cobalamin deficiency (Monsen and Ueland,2003).
Cobalamin statusisassessed viaserum or plasma cobalam in levels.The plasma 
cobalamin levelsofadultswithcobalamin deficiency are approximately(120-180 picomol/L) 
(IOM ,19 98 ).An other reliableindicator of cobalamin statusiselevated me thylmalonic acid 
(MM A) levels(values >0.4m icromol/L)in blood and urine,resultingfrom impaired metabolic 
cobalamin activitywithno specificclinicalsymptom s (Andrès etal., 2007).Thisindicatorcan 
detectametabolicchangethatishighly specifictocobalam in deficiency.
In 1950s,cobalamin was found tobe am ajorcontributing factorto anaemiain pregnancy 
am ongstM alaysians(Tasker,Richardsonand Llewe llyn,1956;Tasker,1958).The Institute for 
M edicalR esearch(IM R) em barked on aseriesoftwo periods offive-yearinterval(1987/88and 
1992/93)intensive studiesintothecauseofthecobalamindeficiency anaemiafrom hospitals 
allover Malaysia (Roshidah and Khalid,1994).The IMR researchersreported thatthere was 
increasein cobalamin deficiencyanaemiaover thefive-yearintervalfrom 2.6% to8.2% with 
m ostIndians having a prevalence ofabout49% ,indicatingthe need to improve cobalamin 
intake inthisgroup.The problem seems to have been observed inindividualsconsuming 
vegetariandietstoo sincecobalamin isfound onlyinanimalproducts (Ros hidahand Khalid, 
1994).Inamo re recentstudy,Khor etal.(2011)reported adequateconcentrationsofserum 
cobalamin am ong 7-12primaryschoolchildreninKualaLum pur. 
210 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
C ob alam in(Vitam in B1 2) 
11.6 Factorsaffectingrequirements 
Strictvegetarians and vegans are atgreaterriskofdevelopingcobalamindeficiencythan 
lacto-ovovegetarianssincenaturalfoodsources ofcobalamin are limited toanimalfoods (IOM, 
1998).
Inthe generalelderly population,plasmacobalamin tendstodecrease and concentration 
ofserum me thylmalonic acid(MMA )tends toincreaseresulting in adecline incobalamin status. 
Factors thatm ay contributeto these changes includea decreaseingastricacidity and the 
presence ofatrophicgastritisandbacterialovergrowthaccompaniedby food-boundcobalamin 
malabsorption.Olderadultswithatrophicgastritisareunabletoabsorb thevitamin B 12 due to 
progressive reduction ofthe inabilityoftheparietalcellstosecrete hydrochloricacid.Ithasalso 
been suggestedthatthedecreasedhydrochloricacid levelsm ightalso increase thegrowth of 
norm alintestinalbacteriainthestomach and intestinethatuse vitamin B 12,furtherreducing 
theamount ofvitamin B12 availableto thebody.Despitetheabsence ofthisacidinpreventing 
the release ofprotein-bound vitamin B1 2,itwo uld not interfere with the absorption offree 
vitaminB 12 found infortifiedfoods or supplements.As a result,theIOM recomm ends that 
adults olderthan50years obtainm ostoftheircobalaminfrom vitam insupplements orfortified 
foods (e.g.,fortified cereals)to prevent cobalamindeficiency (IO M ,199 8).H oweve r,som e 
elderlypatientswith atrophicgastritisrequire doses muc h higher than the R DA to avoid 
subclinicaldeficiency. 
11.7 Settingrequireme nts and recomm ended intake
There w ereno recomm endationsforvitaminK inthe previousversionofMalaysianRNI 
(2005).The main references used by the TechnicalSub-Com m ittee (TSC) on V itamins, 
cobalaminwere the reportsfrom the IOM (1998),WHO/F AO (2004)and theEFS A (2015).The 
rationaleand approachestakenby theseconsultationswere considered.There are no known 
localstudies on cobalamin requireme ntsofcommun itiesthattheTechnicalSub-Com m ittee 
(TSC) on V itaminscould use asa reference when consideringRNI forthevitamin.P revious 
studies of the biochemicalstatusof cobalaminamong Malaysianswere published over 6 
decades agoand recentstudies arerare. 
The F ood and N utritionBoard oftheN ationalAcademy ofSciences (NAS )Instituteof 
Medicinederivedthe recomm ended dietaryallowances based on theirreview on theevidence 
ofintake,statusand health forallagegroupsand duringpregnancy and lactationusingserum 
or plasma vitam inB 12 and MM A asbiomarkersofcobalaminstatus.From thisreview,the 
consultation group derives the calculations of an Estimated Average R equirement (E AR). 
Recom mended dietaryallowances were estimatedtobe theEA Rs plus2 standard deviations 
(SDs).WHO/ FA O (2004)consultation agreedto adoptthe approachofthe IOM (199 8)for 
derivingits recomm ended nutrientintakeofcobalamin.
Inthe Euro pean F ood SafetyAuthority(EF SA)2015consultation report,the Panelagreed 
thatthe most suitableway to derive DietaryReference Values (DRV) for cobalamin isa 
com binationofbiomarkersofcobalamin statusi.e.serum cobalamin,holoTC,MMA and plasma 
totalhomocy steine(tHcy )(EF SA,2015).Based on the literature,the P anelconsidered that 
211 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
C ob alam in(Vitam inB12 ) 
serum concentrationsofholoTC and cobalaminwithinthereference ranges forhealthyadults, 
together w ithMMA and plasma tHcy concen trations below cut-off values for cobalamin 
insufficiency and hyperhomocysteineaemiaareindicative ofanadequatecobalaminstatus.In 
fact,inthe IOM (1998) report,the use ofholoTC and MMA asbiomarkerswas highlighted as 
the high-priorityrecommendations forfuture studies.Thisrecom mendationw as adopted by 
EFS A (2015). 
The TSC isin generalagreementwiththecomprehe nsiveapproach oftheEFSA (2015) 
reportand decidedtoadoptthe valuesproposed by thisorganisation.The proposed valuesfor 
the R NI(2017)for Malaysiaare given inbold inthe following paragraphs accordingto age 
groups and sum marisedin Appendix 11.1
Infants 
Indeterminingcobalaminrequireme nt,EF SA (2015)recom me ndationw as based on the 
estimationofadequateintake(AI)sincethere islimitednumbe r ofstudiesusingan accurate 
m ethod to estimate the breastmilk concentration of cobalam in (E FS A, 2015).Due to 
uncertaintiesinestimatingbreastmilk cobalamin concentrationused forupw ard extrapolation 
from thecobalamin intakeinexclusivelybreast-fed infantsaged 0-6months,and considering 
the use ofscalingdown approachfrom adultsasabasis,an intake consistentwithbiomarker 
data,an AI for cobalamin for infants aged 7-11 m onths at 1.5µg/day was set.The 
recomm endationinterm ofadequateintake(AI)forinfantaged 0-6months w as ma de using 
the proportionbased on recommended value of0-6months inIOM and WHO/FA O,thatis20% 
lowerthan7-12 m onths recomm endation,thus anAIforcobalam inforinfantsaged 0-6mon ths 
w assetat1.2µg/day.
RNI forinfants 
0 -5 m onths 1.2µg/day 
6 -11 m onths 1.5µg/day 
212 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
C ob alam in(Vitam in B1 2) 
Children and Adolescents 
The same recomm endationinterm ofadequateintake (AI)was made forthe intake ofcobalamin 
inchildren and adolescentsby theEFSA (2015)sincethereare insufficientdatatoderive an 
AverageRequirement(AR) (EFSA, 2015).AIswere derivedfrom theunrounded AIsfor adults 
afteradjustmenton the basisofdifferencesin referencebody w eight,and then rounded tothe 
closest0.5.
RN I forchildren
1 -3 years 1.5µg/day 
4 -6 years 1.5µg/day 
7-9 years 2.5µg/day 
RN I foradolescents 
10 -12 years 3.5 µg/day 
13 -18 years 4.0 µg/day 
Adultsand elderly 
The sam e recommen dations we remade fortheintakesofadultsby theEFSA (2015).The 
EF SA Pan eldecided touse acombination ofcobalam in biomarkersofstatustoderive DR V s for 
cobalamin foradults.However ,thereareuncertaintieswith respect to cut-offvalues for 
cobalamininsufficiencyoftheseindicatorsand limiteddataavailableto determine anAR.
Intheabsence oftherequired information,thecobalamin recom menda tionwas ma de 
forthe adults by the EFSA P anelbased on consistent evidence from observational and 
interventionstudies.The studiesshow ed thatintakeofcobalamin at4µg/day and greater is 
associated w ith serum concentrationsofholoTC and cobalaminwithin the reference ranges 
derivedfrom healthy subjects,together with MM A and tHcy concentrationsbelow thecut-off 
values foradults thatindicates an adequatecobalaminstatus.Therefore,the E FSA (2015)P anel 
sets an AIforcobalamin at4µg/dayforadultsbased on dataon different biom arkers of 
cobalaminstatusand in considerationofobserved intakes.The recomm ended intake forolder 
adultsisthesame asthose foradults.
RN I foradults 
19 -6 5 years 4.0 µg/day 
RN I forelderly 
> 65 years 4.0 µg/day 
213 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
C ob alam in(Vitam inB12 ) 
Pregnancy and Lactation 
The EFSA P anelsuggestedthat0.2µg/day ofcobalamin istransferred tothefoetusand 
absorption of40%.An additionalrequirement of0.5µg/dayofcobalamin to the AIfornon- 
pregnantwo me n was felttobe adequate.This addition resultsin anAIof4.5µg/dayforpregnant 
w omen.
An AIfor lactating wom en is based on the cobalamin intake thatis required to 
com pensatefortheamount ofcobalamin secreted inbreastmilk.Itisestimated thatamea n 
m ilktransferof0.8L/dayinexclusivelybreastfeedingw om en duringthe firstsixmo nthsof 
lactation w ould secretebreastm ilk with 0.4µg cobalam in/day.Taking into account 40% 
absorption,an extraamo untof1.0µg/daycobalamin is required to balance thesecretion in 
m ilk.Therefore,anAIof5µ/dayis recomme nded forlactatingwomen.
RNI for
Pregnancy 4.5µg/day 
Lactation 5.0 µg/day 
D iscussion on revised RNI forMal aysia 
Therew ereno recomm endationsforcobalamin inthepreviousversionoftheMalaysian 
R N I.The proposed recom mended intakesfortherevised RNI forMalaysia2017are adopted 
from the latestreportby EFSA (2015).These proposed recomme nded intakes are higherthan 
the recomm endations by IO M (1998) and WHO/ FAO (2004) across allage groups by 
approximately50%.As previously mentioned inSection15.7,theuse ofadditionalbiomarkers 
by EF SA 2015toderive the values ishighlighted and thisprobablycontributes tothedifferences 
invaluesofrecommendations by IOM (199 8)and W HO/FA O (2004)(referAppendix 11.1). 
11.8Toxicity and tolerable intakelevels 
N o toxic or adverseeffects havebeen associated w ithlarge intakes ofcobalaminfrom 
food orsupplementsinhealthypeople.Doses ashigh as 2mg/dayby mouth or1 mg monthly 
by intramuscular(IM)injectionhavebeen used to treatperniciousanaemiawithoutsignificant 
sideeffects.When high doses ofcobalamin are given orally,onlya smallpercentage can be 
absorbed,w hichmay explain thelow toxicity(Carme l,2008).B ecause ofthe low toxicityof 
cobalamin,no tolerable upperintakelevel(UL)hasbeen setby theUS F ood andNutritionBoard. 
214 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
C ob alam in(Vitam in B1 2) 
11.9 Research recom mendat ions 
The followingpriorityareasofresearch arerecommended:
• Determinationofcobalamin statusand extentofdeficiency especiallyamong vegan. 
• Identificationofmore sensitiveand specificbiochemicalme asures ofcobalaminstatus. 
• The contribution of fermented vegetablefoods to cobalam in status of vegan 
com munities. 
215 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
C ob alam in(Vitam inB12 ) 
11.10 References 
Andrès E, Fede riciL,AffenbergerS,Vidal-AlaballJ,LoukiliNH ,Zimmer J,etal.(2007).B12 
deficiency: alookbeyond pernicious anemia.J Fam Pract; 56:537-42. 
CarmelR (2008).H ow Itreatcobalamin (vitamin B12) deficiency.Blood;112(6):2214-2221. 
de JagerCA (2014).Criticallevelsofbrain atrophy associated withhom ocysteine andcognitive 
decline.Neurobiology ofaging, 35Suppl2:S35-9 
EFS A (2015).Scientific Opinionon DietaryR eference Values forcobalamin(vitamin B1 2).E FSA 
Journal;13(7):4150[64 pp.]. 
Institute ofMed icine (199 8).Fo od and Nu tritionB oard.D ietary R eference Intakes:Thiamin, 
Riboflavin,Niacin,VitaminB6,Folate,Cobalamin. P antothenicAcid,B iotin,andCholine. 
Washington,DC: N ationalAcademy P ress. 
KapadiaCR (199 5).Cob alam ininhealth and disease: partI-inherited disorders offunction, 
absorption,and transport.Gastroenterologis.3:329-44. 
KhorG L,Chee WS ,ShariffZM ,Poh BK, Arum ugam M, Rahma n JA,TheobaldHE (2011).High 
prevalence ofvitaminD insufficiency anditsassociation w ith B MI-for-age among primary 
schoolchildren inKualaLum pur,Malaysia.BMC PublicHealth; 11:95 
LahnerE, P ersechino S,AnnibaleB (2012).Micronutrients(Otherthan iron)and Helicobacter 
pyloriinfection: asystematic review.Helicobacter;17(1):1-15. 
M onsen ALB ,Ueland P M (2003).Hom ocysteineand me thylmalonic acidindiagnosisand risk 
assessmentfrom infancytoadolescent.Am J ClinN utr; 78:7-21. 
ShaneB. F olicacid,vitamin B-12,and vitamin B -6.In:StipanukM,ed.(2000).Biochemicaland 
PhysiologicalAspectsofHum an Nutrition.Philadelphia:W .B.Saunders Co.;483-518. 
R oshidah I.and Khalid H (1994).The increasingimportance of cobalamindeficiencyas a 
contributing factorto anemiainMalaysia.Sou theastAsian J Trop Med PublicHealth ;
25(3):457-458 
TaskerP WG (1958).Anaemiainpregnancy: A fiveyearappraisal.Med J Mal ;13: 3 -I0. 
Tasker P WG. R ichardson AM , Llewellyn-Jones DL (1956).An aemia in pregnancy as 
encountered inMalaysia.J ObstetGynaeco; 63:409-14. 
U .S.DepartmentofAgriculture,AgriculturalR esearch Service(2012).USDA NationalN utrient 
D atabase for Standard Reference, R elease25.NutrientDataLaboratoryHom e. 
W H O/FAO (2004).Vitamin and mineralrequirements inhum an nutrition. 2nd ed.G eneva:W orld 
H ealthO rganization. 
216 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
C ob alam in(Vitam in B1 2) 
M alaysia (20 17) 
A ge group RNI (µg/day) 
IOM (19 9 8) W H O/FA O 20 0 4 (20 0 4) EFSA (20 15) 
A ppendix 11.1 C om parison ofrecom m ended intakes forC obalam in (Vitam in B12):RNIM alaysia (20 17),A Iand RDA (IOM ,19 9 8),RNI(W H O/FA O,20 0 4) 
and A I(EFSA ,20 15) 
A ge group A I (µg/day) A ge group RNI (µg/day) A ge group A I (µg/day) 
Infants (boys) Infants Infants Infants 
0 -5m onths 1.2 0 -6 m onths 0.4 0 -6 m onths 0.4 
6 -11 m onths 1.5 7 -12 m onths 0.5 7 -12 m onths 0.7 7 -11 m onths 1.5 
Infants (girls) 
0 -5m onths 1.2 
6 -11 m onths 1.5 
RDA (µg/day) 
C hildren (boys) C hildren (boys) C hildren (boys) C hildren 
1 -3 years 1.5 1 -3 years 0.9 1 -3 years 0.9 1 -3 years 1.5 
4 -6 years 1.5 4 -8 years 1.2 4 -6 years 1.2 4 -6 years 1.5 
7 -9 years 2.5 7 -9 years 1.8 7 -10 years 2.5 
C hildren (girls) C hildren (girls) C hildren (girls) 
1 -3 years 1.5 1 -3 years 0.9 1 -3 years 0.9 
4 -6 years 1.5 4 -8 years 1.2 4 -6 years 1.2 
7 -9 years 2.5 7 -9 years 1.8 
A dolescent(Boys) A dolescent(Boys) A dolescent(Boys) A dolescent
10 -12 years 3.5 9 -13 years 1.8 10 -18 years 2.4 11 -14 years 3.5 
14 -18 years 2.4 
13 -14 years 4 15-17 years 4
15years 4
16 -18 years 4
217 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
C ob alam in(Vitam inB12 ) 
M alaysia (20 17) 
A ge group RNI (µg/day) 
IOM (19 9 8) W H O/FA O 20 0 4 (20 0 4) EFSA (20 15) 
A ge group A I (µg/day) A ge group RNI (µg/day) A ge group A I (µg/day) 
A dolescent(G irls) A dolescent(G irls) 
10 -12 years 3.5 9 -13 years 1.8 
13 -14 years 4 14 -18 years 2.4 
15years 4
16 -18 years 4
M en M en A dults A dults 
19 -29 years 4 19 -30 years 2.4 19 -65years 2.4 >18 years 4
30 -50 years 4 31 - 50 years 2.4 >6.5years 2.4 
51 -59 years 4 51 -70 years 2
60 -65years 4 >70 years 2
>65years 4
W om en W om en 
19 -29 years 4 19 -30 years 2.4 
30 -50 years 4 31 -50 years 2.4 
51 -59 years 4 51 -70 years 2.4 
60 -65years 4 >70 years 2.4 
>65years 4
Pregnancy 4.5 Pregnancy 2.6 Pregnancy 2.6 Pregnancy 4.5 
Lactation 5 Lactation 2.8 Lactation 2.8 Lactation 5
218 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
12 • A scorbic Acid(Vitamin C) 
12.1 Introduction 
Vitamin C,also known asL-ascorbic acid,isanessentialwatersolublevitamin required 
forvarious biologicaland physiologicalprocessesofthe bod y.Ithasbeen controversiallyused 
topreventordelaythe occurrence ofchronicdiseases andtotreatcertainillnesses.L-Ascorbic 
acid,also know n as L-xyloascorbic acid,3-oxo-L-gulofuranolactone (enol form ), L-3- 
ketothreohexuronic acidlactone and antisorbuticvitamin,has thechemicalformulaC6H8O 6 and 
amolecularw eightof176.12.The naturalform ofthevitaministheL-isomer.Most plantsand 
animalssynthesise ascorbicacidfortheirown requirement.H oweve r,human andseveralother 
animalspeciesincludingprimates and guineapigare unableto synthesiseitdue toadeficiency 
ofL-gulonolactoneoxidase,a terminalenzyme inthebiosyntheticpathwayofascorbicacid, 
becauseofm utation in thegene encoding fortheenzyme. Therefore,vitamin C must be solely 
obtainedfrom thediet,mainly throughfruitsand vegetablesto maintaina normalmetabolic 
functioningofthebody (Daud,Ismail,Sarmadi,2016).
12.2 Functions 
VitaminC isa water-soluble vitamin im portantfor collagen form ation,a proteinthat 
gives structure tobones,cartilage,m uscleandblood vessels.Italsohelps maintaincapillaries, 
bones,and teethandaidsin theabsorption ofiron.Ascorbicacid,areducing agent,isnecessary 
to maintain theenzyme prolylhydroxylasein an active form, mos tlikely by keepingits iron 
atom inareduced state.The precursormoleculetotheproteincollagen,procollagen,contains 
anunusualam inoacidsequence inthateverythirdamino acidis aglycineand containsahigh 
frequency of two amino acids not found in any other proteins - hydroxyprolineand 
hydroxylysine.These lattertwo am inoacidsareconvertedfrom prolineand lysine,respectively, 
afterthe procollagenm oleculehasbeen synthesised.The hydroxylationofprolineand lysine 
inprocollagen iscarried outby the enzyme prolylhydroxylaseusingascorbicacidasacofactor. 
Ascorbicacidplaysanimportantroleasacomponent ofenzymes involved in thesynthesisof 
collagenand carnitine;however,itsmost vitalroleisasawater-solublevitamininthehuman 
body (Sies& Stahl,1995;Levineetal., 1995). 
Ascorbic acid isapowerfulantioxidantbecause itcan donateahydrogen atom and form 
arelativelystableascorbylfreeradical.As ascavengerofreactiveoxygen and nitrogenoxide 
species,ascorbicacid has been shown to be effectiveagainstthe superoxide radicalion, 
hydrogen peroxide,the hydroxylradicaland singletoxygen (Web er,Be ndich & Schalch,1996). 
Ascorbicacidprotectsfolicacid reductase,which convertsfolicacidto folinicacid,and may 
helpreleasefreefolicacidfrom itsconjugatesinfood.Ascorbicacidfacilitatesthe absorption 
ofiron. 
Vitamin C hasbeen controversiallyused topreventor delaytheoccurrence ofchronic 
diseasesand totreatcertainillnesses.Currentevidenceson thetherapeuticroleofvitaminC 
inseveralchronic illnessesincludingcardiovasculardisease (CVD),cancer,and respiratory 
illnessesarenotconsistent(Fortmann etal. 2013).
219 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Ascorbic Ac id (VitaminC ) 
12.3. M etabolism 
Ascorbicacid ispresentinallpartsofthebody atvaryingconcentrationintheplasma, 
bone cells,and cellularimmune system.Body stores ofvitamin C can be affected by dietary 
intake,excretion rateinrenaltubule,faecallosses,and m etaboliclosses.U pon ingestion, 
vitamin C isabsorbedthroughpassivediffusionmediated or facilitated by facilitativeglucose 
transporters(GLUT )and a saturable-substratetransportmechanism via ascorbate-specific 
transporter(sodium vitamin C transporter(SVCT)).Oralvitamin C isabsorbed forapproximately 
70-9 0% atmoder ateintake(30-180mg day),but absorption rate falls below 50%atintake 
above1000m g day.Evidence from pharmacokinetics studiesindicated thatconsum ptionofat 
least200m g dayofvitamin C in healthyyoung adultsleads toplasma concentrationofmor e 
than 50m M, which is anearlycomplete oralbioavailability,indicated by leukocytesaturation 
and m inimum urinaryexcretion.Thissuggests thatingestion of vitam inC orally produces 
plasma concentrations thatare tightlycontrolled.Ab sorbed vitamin C istransportedin the 
plasmaasfreeanion ascorbateand isdistributed toalltissues.Atcelllevels,particularlyinthe 
osteoblast,muscle,and retinalcells,anoxidized form ofvitamin C known as dehydroascorbic 
acid (DHA )istaken up by G LUT and then reduced internally to ascorbic acid.Whilst,active 
transportationofascorbateviaSVCT issubjected tosubstratefeedback inhibitionindicatinga 
regulatory rolein maintaining ascorbateconcentrationinthecells.
In terms ofbody store,atotalbody contentofvitamin C in healthy adults ranges from 
300mg to 2 g w ithhigherconcentrations m aintainedintheleukocytes,eyes,adrenalglands, 
pituitary gland,andbrain.Excessive vitaminC intake thatisnotme tabolised isexcreted ma inly 
inthe urine,and toalesserextentin the faeces.Inhealthy non-smoking me n,up to40to50 
m g per day vitamin C willbe excreted.Am ong smo kers,the m etaboliclosess arehigher by 
50% than non-smok ers.Inhum ans,the m ainroute of rem ovalof ascorbicacidisthrough 
urinaryexcretion,ofw hichascorbicacid isoxidized todehydroascorbic acid,then subsequently 
hydrolysed to diketogulonic acid.Diketogulonic acidis further decomp osited to various 
com pounds such asoxalic and threonicacids.
Ascorbicacidisthe m ostpotent enhancer of non-heme ironabsorption.A study by 
H allberg (1987)showed thatiron absorptionfrom non-heme food sources can be increased 
significantlywith adailyascorbicacidintakeofatleast25mg foreach mea l(estimated for 3 
me als/day).H igherascorbicacidintakesshould be considered ifmealscontain highercontents 
ofnutrientinhibitorssuch asphytatesand tannins. 
12.4.Sources 
Ascorbic acidisw idely distributed in nature,m ostly richin fresh fruits and leafy 
vegetablesfollowed by animalsources.Fruitsrichinvitamin C includeguava,m ango,papaya, 
citrusfruitsandjuices,tomatoesandtomato juice.Vege tables w ith themos tvitamin C include 
cabbage,cauliflower,m ustardleaves,spinachand otherleafy greens and ‘ulam’,broccoli,turnip 
greens,sweet and whitepotatoesand w inter squash (Tee etal., 1997, Chang,Ismail,Daud, 
2016)(Table 12.1).Som e cerealsandotherfoods aswellasbeverages arefortifiedwithvitamin 
C (Chang etal,2016).Localherbs and spices includingginger are alsorich invitaminC and 
hashighantioxidantactivities(Ghasem zadeh,Jaafar,Rahma t2010). 
220 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Ascorbic Ac id (Vitamin C) 
Anim alsources of this vitamin such as m eat,fish,poultry,eggs and dairyproducts 
containsm alleram ountsand arenotsignificantsources.Mos tfood-based dietaryguidelines 
aresimilarinthatallrecommend consumption of5servings offruits and vegetables daily.If 
thisrecommen dation isfollowed,dailyintakeofascorbicacidwillbe 210to280mg ,depend ing 
on foodcontentfactors(Levineetal., 1999).Ascorbic acidistheleaststableofallvitaminsand 
iseasilydestroyed duringprocessing and storage.Juicesare good foods tobe fortifiedwith 
ascorbicacidbecause their acidity reduces ascorbicaciddestruction.Exp osure to oxygen, 
prolonged heatingin the presence of oxygen,contactwithminerals(iron and copper)and 
exposureto lightaredestructive totheascorbic acidcontentoffoods.
Table 12.1. Ascorbic Acid (VitaminC) contentoffoods
Food Per 100 g 
Fruits
Guava 152.0 
Longan 72.1 
Papaya 70.9 
Lime 36.9 
Tangerine/mandarin 28.0 
Durianbelanda(Soursop) 26.9 
Mango 20.5 
Rambutan 18.8 
Hone ydew m elon 18.0 
Banana 17.3 
Jambu air(Waterapple) 16.7 
Pineapple 15.2 
Jackfruit 7.9 
Pear 7.6 
Grape 7.6 
Waterm elon 5.5 
Apple,red 4.9 
Starfruit 4.8 
Vegetables
Green leafy 
Tapiocashoots 192.0 
Cekur manis 136.0 
Kale(kai-lan) 107.0 
Mustardleaves(sawi) 89.0 
Sweetpotatoshoots 81.1 
Bak Choy 60.0 
221 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Ascorbic Ac id (VitaminC ) 
12.5 Deficiencies 
P lasma vitamin C has a moderate correlation with vitamin C intake.Ho wever,the 
correlationmay be affectedor influenced by thepresence ofexternalfactors such asvitamin 
bioavailability,absorptioncondition,stressand food processingand storagetime,or by error 
inreporting vitamin C intake(Dehghanetal., 2007).Severe deficiency ofascorbicacidcauses 
scurvy.Symptoms appearwhen theserum levelfallsbelow 0.2m g/dl.A totalbody poolofless 
than300m g isassociatedwithsymptoms ofscurvy,whilema ximum body poolsare limitedto 
about2 g (IOM,2000).
Severalsymptoms ofascorbic aciddeficiency have been recognizedincludingfollicular 
hyperkeratosis,swo llen and inflamed gum s,looseningofteeth,dryness ofthe m outh andeyes, 
loss of hairand dry itchy skin.These symp tom s reflect the role of ascorbic acid in the 
m aintenance of collagen and blood vessel integrity. It is an acute or chronic disease 
characterised by hem orrhagicmanifestationsand abnormalosteoidand dentinformation.The 
psychologicalmanifestations ofscurvyincludedepressionand hysteria.Thispotentiallyfatal 
disease canbe prevented w ithaslittleas10m g ascorbicacidperday,anamo unteasilyobtained 
through consum ptionoffreshfruits and vegetables.
Food Per100 g 
Spinach 56.4 
Sw amp cabbage(kangkong) 48.3 
SaladorUlam 
Cashew leaves(Pucuk gajus) 91.0 
Kadok 78.9 
M aman 72.0 
Ulam raja 65.0 
F our-angledbean 11.3 
Other vegetables 
B ellpeppers 112.0 
B roccoli 85.0 
B itterG ourd 53,0 
Carrot 53.0 
Cabbage 53.0 
Cauliflower 42.6 
Lettuce 27.6 
Tomato 25.8 
Okra 19.3 
Tubers
Tapioca 35.9 
Source: Tee etal., 1997 
222 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Ascorbic Ac id (Vitamin C) 
There are no reports of ascorbic acid deficiency amo ng M alaysianpopulation. 
Nevertheless,vitamin C intakein variousnutrition surveysin M alaysiaindicatedinadequacy of 
intakeinspecificgroups.Findingsfrom theMalaysianAdultsNutritionindicatedthatthemea n 
ofvitamin C intake,afterexcluding overreporters,is72 ± 1.4mg/day(103%R N I)and 75± 2.9 
mg/day(107% RNI),forthe year2003and 2014,respectively(Zainuddinetal., 2017).Re port 
from MA NS 2003indicatedthatIndiansand thosefrom theEastCoasthad thelowestintakes 
butthere areno cleardifferences between genderand localityofruraland urban areas (M irnalini 
etal., 2008).M eanofvitamin C intakeamong Malaysianolderadultsfrom alargescalestudy 
is113mg/d inm en and 118mg/d in women, withathirdhasinadequateintake (Kamarudinet 
al.2016).Inchildren,vitamin C inadequacy isalsoreported inatleast20% ofthe subjects 
(P oh etal., 2013),with m oreboys aged 7-12yearsdid notachievethe M alaysianRNI forenergy 
and vitaminC compared withtheirfemalecounterparts.On theotherhand,inruralareas,the 
percentageofgirlsaged4-6yearswho didnotachievetheMalaysian RNI forvitaminsC and A 
was mor e thandouble thatoftheboys.However, itshouldbe emphasised thatthere isno data 
on subclinicaland clinicaldeficiencyam ong Malaysianpopulation.
12.6 Factorsaffectingascorbicacidrequirements
Variousfactors have been identified to affectvitaminC requirem ent.These include 
bioavailability,nutrient-to-nutrientinteractions,andgender.G enerally,vitamin C requirement is 
increased inspecialpopulation including pregnantand lactatingwome n aswe llas sm okers 
whe n com paredto theirage group counterpart.Thisisto reflectthe differentphysiological 
requireme ntsin these groups.Inpregnantwomen ,higherrequirementisneeded to accountfor 
expansion of blood volume and active transferto the foetus,wh ilefor lactating wo m en,to 
accountforvitaminC transfer tobreastmilk.For heavysmok ers(i.e.,sm okingmore than 20 
cigarettesperday),higherintakeisneeded toaccount.As me ntioned earlier,dataavailableon 
vitaminC intake or statusand cardiovasculardiseaserelated outcom es and vision-related 
outcomes arenotconsistentorspecificenough asacriterionforderivingtherecommendation 
forvitaminC (EFS A,2013). 
The type of food consumed has not been shown to have a significanteffect on the 
absorptionofascorbic acid.Althoughabsorptionofascorbicaciddecreases toabout50%and 
lesswith the singledoses above1g,some 70-90%ofusualdietaryintake ofascorbicacid(30 
-180 mg /day)isabsorbed. Bioavailabilitywas comp leted for 200m g ofascorbicacidasa 
singledose.No ascorbic acid was excretedin the urineofsixofseven volunteers untilthe100 
mg dose.Atsingle dose of500mg and higher,bioavailabilitydeclined andthe absorbed amount 
was excreted(Levineetal., 1996).
Ascorbic acidis very labile,and thelossofascorbicacidupon boilingmilkprovidesone 
dramaticexampleofacauseofinfantilescurvy.The ascorbicacidcontentoffood isstrongly 
influenced by season,transportationto market,shelflife,time ofstorage,cooking practices 
and chlorinationofwater. 
223 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Ascorbic Ac id (VitaminC ) 
12.7 Setting requirementsand recom mended intakeofascorbicacid
Ascorbic acid is alreadyincluded in the listof vitamins in MalaysianR NI2005.The 
TechnicalSub-Com mittee (TSC) on V itamins noted that in establishing the 2005 
recom men dations,there were no known localstudies on ascorbic acid requirements of 
comm unitiesthatthe TSC coulduse as areference wh en considering RN Iforthevitamin.There 
w ere alsovery few reportsofthe biochem icalstatus ofthe vitamin amo ngstthe population 
groups.The TSC had referredtorecomm endationsavailablefrom diverse professionalbodies 
pertainingto vitamin C intake recom m endation,mainly the WHO/ F AO (2004)consultation 
reportand theIOM (2000)DR Irecom menda tions.Upon reviewingavailableinformation,the 
TSC on V itaminsdecided to adopttheWHO/ F AO (2004)values asthe Malaysian RN I2005.
Inthe process ofpreparing forthe 2017review ofR NIforascorbic acid,theTSC on 
V itaminssourced for available references.There arestillno localstudies on ascorbic acid 
requirement s or status. WHO /FAO and IOM too have not updated theirascorbicacid 
recomme ndations.Itw ashowever foundthatthe European Food SafetyAuthorityhad published 
recomm ended intakes for thisvitamin (E F SA,2013)w hich the TSC included asa reference. 
EFS A recom me ndationalthoughthelatest,w asnotadoptedby theRNI 2017,as itw asderived 
from few smallscalesm etabolic studiesamong healthyme n (EFS A,2013). 
The TSC V itaminsdecidedtocontinuetoadopt the WHO/F AO (2004)recommenda tions 
for ascorbic acid for M alaysiaRN I2017.These recom m endations,w hich areinline with 
previousRNI (NCC FN ,2005),aregivenin bold inthefollow ing paragraphs,accordingtoage 
groups and sum marisedin Appendix 12.1. 
Infants 
H um anmilkisrecognisedastheoptimalmilksource forinfantsatleastthroughoutthe 
firstyearoflife.Itis recomm ended asthesole nutritionalm ilk sourceforinfants during thefirst 
4 to 6 m onthsoflife.IOM (2000)estimatedtheAIforinfantsbased on theaverage volume of 
m ilkintake of780m land anaverageconcentrationofascorbicacidof50mg/linhuman milk. 
For infants 0-6months,40mg per daywas the estimatedAIand forthe 7-12 months infants, 
the AIw as50m g per day,taking into consideration the am ountofascorbicacid from solid 
foods consumed atthis stage.
The FA O/WHO expertconsultation(WHO /FAO,2004)estimated themean ascorbicacid 
concentration inhuman maturemilk as40m g/l.H owev er,itwas feltthatthe amo untofascorbic 
acid in huma n milk appearsto reflect ma ternaldietary intake ratherthan the infantsneeds. 
M oreover,itw asnoted that8 mg/dayofascorbicacidissufficienttopreventscorbuticsigns 
ininfants.The Consultation therefore arbitrarilysetthe recomme nded intake forinfantsaged 
0-6 mont hs at25mg/day.The recommend ed intake forolderinfantswas gradually increased 
to 30 mg per day.EFSA (2013)alsoreportedthatthere areno new datato set an average 
requirement (AR) forinfant,thusa populationreference intake (PRI)ofinfants aged 6 to11 
mo nths at20mg /day has been used asDRI.The TSC adopted the recom m endation oftheWH O/ 
FA O (2004)asfollows:
224 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Ascorbic Ac id (Vitamin C) 
RN I forinfants 
0 -5 m onths 25 mg/day 
6 -11 m onths 30 mg/day 
Children and adolescents 
No dataw ere available on w hichto base an estimated average requirement (EA R) for 
children1 through 18 yearsofage.Thus,theIOM (2000)estimated theEA Rs and RDAs for 
childrenon the basisofrelative body weight.
The WHO/ FA O (2004)recomme nded intakes for ascorbic acid for children and 
adolescentsw ere graduallyincreasedfrom therecommende d intakeforinfants.EFSA (2013) 
alsorecommended similarincrementaccording toagegroups.Indecidingon recomm ended 
intakefor olderchildren,eg adolescents,the TSC considered the possiblerole thatascorbic 
acidcanplayinreducingthehighprevalenceofirondeficiency anem iainthecountry(Tee et 
al., 1998).Hallberg(1987)had observed thattheadditionalintakeofatleast25m g ascorbic 
acidpromot es absorption ofsolublenon-haem iron.Inaddition,recentstudies have pointed 
towardsapossibleantioxidantroleforascorbic acid,ieabilityto scavenge reactive oxidantsin 
activatedleucocytes,lung,gastricmucosa and to protectagainstlipidperoxidation.The TSC 
therefore decided to increasethe amount recom mended by WH O/ F AO (2004) by 25mg 
ascorbic acidperdaytoallage groups from children 10years andabove.This is inline withthe 
factthatiron deficiency isstillprevalentam ong Malaysianpopulation especiallychildren, 
adolescentand pregnantm others(Tee etal. 1998; Foo etal. 2004;Ha niffetal. 2007;Ngui e t
al. 2012). 
RN I forchildren 
1 -3 years 30 m g/day 
4 -6 years 30 m g/day 
7 -9 years 35 m g/day 
RN I foradolescents 
Boys 10 -18 years 65 m g/day 
Girls10 -18 years 65 m g/day 
225 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Ascorbic Ac id (VitaminC ) 
Adults 
The classicdiseaseof severe ascorbicaciddeficiency,scurvy,is now rareinmost 
countries.Otherhum anexperimentaldatathatcanbe utilized to setaascorbicacidrequiremen t, 
based on abiomarkerotherthanscurvy,are limited.The IOM (2000)recommende d intakes of 
ascorbic acidare based on an amo unt ofthe vitam inthatisthoughtto provide antioxidant 
protection as derived from the correlation of such protection with neutrophilascorbate 
concentrations.Itishowever recognised thatthere isno huma n datato directlyquantifythe 
dose-response relationship between ascorbicacidintake and invivo antioxidantprotection.
B ased on ascorbicacid intakes sufficientto m aintain near-maximal neutrophil 
concentrations w ithm inimalurinary loss,IOM (2000)setan E AR of75m g/day ofascorbic 
acidformen. Based on this,and assuming acoefficientofvariationof10%,RDA forascorbic 
acidfor men was comp uted to be 120% of estimated requirement or 90 mg/day.Since no 
similardataw ereavailable forwomen, itisassume d thatw omen willhave lowerrequirement 
due totheirsmallerleanbody mass,totalbody w ater,and body size.The R DA forw omen was 
thus setat75mg/day.
The IOM noted thatata ascorbicacidintakeof 9 0 mg /day,the plasma ascorbate 
concentration reaches 50µmol/l which has been shown to inhibitLDL oxidation in vitro 
systems. Although itisnotknown whether ascorbicacidpreventsLDL oxidationinvivo,ifit 
does thismightbe relevantintheprevention ofheartdisease.Also,since neutrophilsare at80 
percentsaturation atanEAR of75mg/day,thisshouldpotentially protectintracellularproteins 
from oxidativeinjury when these cells are activated during infectious and inflammatory 
processes.EFSA (2013)alsoused calculationconsidering metabolicvitaminC lossesandallow 
the ma intenanceof an adequate bod y pool characterized by fasting plasma ascorbate 
concentrationsataround50umol/L,to arrive atan Average Re quirement (AR) of90 mg/day. 
Furtheradditionof10% coefficientofvariationlead toasuggestionofaPopulationRe ference 
Intake(PRI)of110m g/dayformen. Adjustment forsm allerbody size ofwome n led toanAR 
of80 mg/dayand P RIof95mg/day.
W HO/ F AO (2004)calculated the dietaryintake from physiologic requirem ents.At 
saturationthe w hole body contentofascorbateinadultmales isapproximately20 mg/kg,or 
1500m g.Clinicalsigns ofscurvyappearw hen thewhole body contentfallsbelow 300-400mg, 
and the lastsigns disappearwhen the body content reaches about 1000 mg. Inthese 
experiments,ascorbatein the whole bod y was catabolised atan approximate rateof 2.9 
percent/day.
There is asigmoidalrelationshipbetween intakeand plasma concentrationsofascorbic 
acid.Atlow doses,dietaryascorbicacidisalmostcompletelyabsorbed,butovertherangeof 
usualdietary intakes (30-180 m g/day),absorption m ay decrease to 75percentbecause of 
competingfactorsin thefood.A body contentof900 mg fallshalfwaybetween tissue saturation 
and the pointatw hichclinicalsigns ofscurvy appear.Assum inganabsorptionefficiency of85 
percent,and acatabolic rate of2.9,theaverageintake ofascorbicacidcanbe calculated as: 
900 x 2.9/100x 100/85= 30.7mg/day,w hich can be rounded offto30m g/day. 
The recom mended nutrientintake(RNI)would thereforebe: 
226 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Ascorbic Ac id (Vitamin C) 
900 x (2.9+1.2)/100x 100/85= 43.4mg/day,which canbe rounded offto 45 
mg/day. 
No turnoverstudies have been done inw omen, butfrom thesmallerbody sizeandwhole 
body contentofw omen, requirements might be expected to be lower.How ever,indepletion 
studies plasma concentrationsfellmore rapidlyinwomen than inmen .WHO /FA O (2004) 
therefore m adethesame recomm endationfornon-pregnant,non-lactatingw omen asformen. 
N evertheless,EFS A (2013)recommended alowervalue forwo men as w omen reach the plateau 
ofplasmaascorbate concentration atalowervitamin C intakethanme n.
An intake of45mg/daywillensure thatmeasurableamountsofascorbatewillbe present 
intheplasmaofm ostpeopleand w illbe availabletosupplytissuerequirementsformetabolism 
or repairatsites ofdepletionor damage.A whole body contentofaround 900 mg ofascorbic 
acidwould provideatleast1 m onth’ssafetyinterval,even fora zero intake,before thebody 
contentfallsto300mg.
Ithas been reported thatelderlypeoplegenerally havelower plasmaandtissue ascorbate 
levelsthanyoung people,oftenbecauseofpoordentitionorm obilityproblems.Ho w ever,W H O/ 
FAO (2004)feltthatthe requirementsofelderly peopledo notdiffersubstantiallyfrom thoseof 
younger people in the absence of pathology,which may influence absorption or renal 
functioning.The recommended intakefortheelderlyarethereforethesame asthoseforadults 
(45m g/day).EFS A (2013)alsonoted thatthereisascarcity ofdataon theinfluence ofageing 
on ascorbicm etabolism, thus,the recom mendation is similar to adults. Both Au stria- 
ConfoederatioHelvetica(D-A-CH,2013)and theEuropean Food SafetyAuthority(EF SA,2013) 
recomm ended ahigherintakeofascorbic acid (ie.D-A-CH:100m g perdayforadultsregardless 
ofgender;EFSA: 110mg per day formen and 95 mg per day for wo m en >18 years old)to 
outwe igh the benefitofhigherintake on thereduction inthe risk ofchronicdiseases.H ow ever, 
theTSC Vitaminsfeltthattheevidencefor thisisnotconclusiveand consistent.
For reasons alreadym entioned above for the adolescents,the TSC on Vitamins has 
proposed that25mg perdayascorbicacid be added on tothe WHO/ F AO (2004)recom me nded 
intakeof45m g per dayforallgroups above 10yearsofage.
RN I foradults 
Men 19 -65 years 70 m g/day 
Women 19 -65 years 70 m g/day 
RN I forelderly 
Men > 65 years 70 m g/day 
Women > 65 years 70 m g/day 
227 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Ascorbic Ac id (VitaminC ) 
Pregnancy and Lactation 
During pregnancy,thereis amoderate extradrainon ascorbicacid,particularlyduring 
the lasttrimester.Ithasbeen reportedthat8 mg/dayofascorbicacidissufficienttoprevent 
scorbuticsignsin infantsaged 4-17m onths.WHO/F AO (2004)thereforeprovided anextra10 
m g/daythroughoutpregnancy,tobring therecommende d intake to55mg/day.Thisenables 
reserves toaccumu latetome etthe extraneeds ofthegrowing foetusinthelasttrimes ter.EFSA 
(2013)also suggestedasimilarquantum ofadditionalintake of10mg/ dayforpregnancy.
During lactation,ithasbeen estimated that20 mg/dayofascorbicacidissecreted in 
m ilk.For anassumed absorption efficiency of85percent,an extra25mg willbe needed by the 
m other.WH O/F AO (2004)thereforerecom m ended thatthe R NIshould be setat70mg tofulfill 
the needs ofboththem otherand infantduring lactation.Ho wever,E PSA (2013)recommen ded 
ahighervalue,asitwas estimatedthat40mg/dayofvitamin C issecreted withmilkoverthe 
firstsix mon ths postpartum. Further,EPSA (2013)assumed anabsorption rateof80%,amean 
of50 mg /day is requiredto balance the am ountofvitamin C secreted inm ilkfor exclusive 
breastfeeding wo men duringthe firstsixm onths of lactation.Assum ing a CV of10% and 
additionalintakeof60mg/ dayis recommende d forw omen breastfeedingexclusively. 
For thesame reasonsmentionedfortheadolescents,theTSC forV itaminssuggested to 
add anadditional25m g perdayofascorbicacidtotheW HO /FAO (2004)recommende d intake 
for pregnantand lactatingwomen.
RNI for 
Pregnancy 80 m g/day 
Lactation 95 m g/day 
D iscussions on revisedRNI for Malaysia 
The 2017RNI values forascorbicacidforMalaysia,adapted from WHO /FAO (2004),but 
w iththeadditionof25mg perdayforallagegroups above 10yearsofage,arealso thesame 
asthose adopted by theWorking G roup fortheHa rmonisationofRDA s inSoutheastAsia(Tee 
& Florentino,2005).The SEA Group alsodecidedtoprovideforanadditionalamount of25mg 
m entioned above.Appendix 12.1provides asumm ary ofthese revised RNI,w hichiscompa red 
w iththe previous MalaysianRN I(NCCFN, 2005),theW HO/FA O (2004)recomm endations,the 
values recommen ded by IOM (2000)and recommen dations ofE FSA (2013).G enerally,allofthe 
recomm endationsadoptedcalculations based on percentages ofascorbic acidbeingabsorbed 
m inus the am ount losses,however,W HO/ FAO (2004) quantified based on physiological 
requirement.Whilst,both IOM (2000)and EFSA (2013)com putedbased on metabolicstudies 
involvingfew samples of healthy men. The recom m endation from E FSA (2013),set as 
P opulation Reference Intake(PRI)is the highestas itadded another10% coefficientvariation 
from the Average R equirement (AR ) provided by IOM (2004). WH O/FAO (2004) 
recomm endationisthelowest asitconsidered asminimum requirementtoma intainascorbic 
228 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Ascorbic Ac id (Vitamin C) 
acidpool,to preventdeficiency.R NI2017proposed a similar recomme ndationasRNI 2005 
(N CCFN ,2005),ofwhich 25m g/day isadded totheWHO/ FA O (2004),inorder toincrease 
absorptionor ironin thedietam ong populationofwhich anemiaisstillprevalentsuch asthe 
SoutheastAsiaregionasdiscussed earlier. 
12.8Toxicityand tolerableupper intake levels 
The review by IOM (2000) reported no evidence suggesting thatascorbic acidis 
carcinogenicor teratogenic or thatitcausesadversereproductive effects.High intakes ofthe 
vitaminhavebeen reportedtohavelow toxicity;adverseeffectshave been reported primarily 
afterverylargedoses (greaterthan3 g/day).Data obtained showe d littleincrease inplasma 
steady-state concentrationsatintakesabove 200mg/day.Saturableintestinalabsorption and 
renaltubularreabsorption datasuggestthatoverloadofascorbicacidisunlikelyinhumans. 
Po ssibleadverse effects associated with very high intakes have been reviewe d and include: 
diarrheaand othergastrointestinaldisturbances,increasedoxalateexcretionand kidneystone 
formation,increaseduric acidexcretion,pro-oxidanteffects,systemic conditioning(“rebound 
scurvy”),increasedironabsorptionleadingtoironoverload,reduced vitamin B12 and copper 
status,increased oxygen dem and,and erosion ofdentalenam el.The tolerable upper intake 
levels (UL s)asproposed by IOM (2000)forvariousage groups are tabulated in Table 12.2. 
EFSA (2013)how ever,did notsetanyU L.
Table 12.2 TolerableUpper IntakeLevels (UL)ofascorbicacidforvariousage groups 
A ge groups mg/ day ofpreformed ascorbic acid 
Infants Not possibleto establish;source ofintake 
shouldbe formulaand food only 
Children 
1 – 3 years 400 
4 – 8 years 650 
9 – 13years 1,200 
Adolescents,14 – 18 years 1,800 
Men, ≥ 19 years 2,000 
Women, ≥ 19 years 2,000 
Pregnantw omen 
14 – 18 years 1,800 
> 19 years 2,000 
Lactatingw omen 
14 – 18 years 1,800 
> 19 years 2,000 
Source:IOM (2000) 
229 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Ascorbic Ac id (VitaminC ) 
The WH O/F AO (2004)reportpointedoutthatthepotentialtoxicityofexcessive doses of 
supplementalascorbicacid relatestointra-intestinaleventsand totheeffectsofmetabolites in 
the urinarysystem. Intakesof2-3g/dayofascorbicacidproduce unpleasantdiarrheafrom the 
osm otic effects of the unabsorbed vitam in in the intestinal lum en in m ost people. 
G astrointestinaldisturbances can occurafteringestionofas littleas 1 g because approximately 
halfofthe amo untwould notbe absorbedatthisdose.O xalateisanend productofascorbate 
catabolismand playsanimportantroleinkidney stoneformation.Exc essivedailyamounts of 
ascorbicacidproduce hyperoxaluria.The riskof oxalatestones form ation may becom e 
significantathigh intakesofascorbic acid(>1g),particularlyinsubjectsw ithhighamounts of 
urinary calcium.The WHO /WHO Consultation feltthat1 g ascorbic acid appearsto be the 
advisableupperlimitofdietaryintake. 
V itaminC intakeatdose beyond 3g/dayisassociated w ith gastrointestinaldisturbance 
due to the unabsorbed ascorbate.Ho wever,participants thatwere administeredintravenous 
vitamin C up to100g perinfusion withinafew hoursin apharmacokineticsstudy didnotreport 
anyadverseeffects,demonstrating thesafetyofthisvitamin atmega dose.Neve rtheless,high 
doses ofvitamin C arecontraindicated inspecialpopulationincludingchronickidney disease 
patients and hyperoxaluriadue to inability to excrete excessive oxalate from metabolic 
conversionof vitamin C.M eanwhile,in patients with glucose-6-phosphatedehydrogenase 
deficiency,highdoses ofvitam inC could induce acutehemolysis.Mo reover,high doses of 
vitam inC could hamper copper absorption and thus inhibitcopper-containingsuperoxide 
dismutase,animportantenzyme in antioxidantdefence.On theotherhand,very highdoses of 
vitaminC couldenhanceintestinalironabsorptiontoadangerous levelam ong individuals with 
hereditarydiseases such ashem ochroma tosisand thalassem ia.Ithasbeen show n insome 
studiesthatexcessive vitamin C intake (>1g day)m ayinduce severeurine acidification,leading 
to impairedexcretion ofweak acids and bases,resultingindepositionofcystinateand uratein 
the urinary tractand formationofkidneystones,forreduced absorptionand increased daily 
turnoverpertaining tohigheroxidativestressinthispopulation. 
230 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Ascorbic Ac id (Vitamin C) 
12.9. ResearchRecom mendat ions 
The followingpriorityareasofresearch arerecommended:
• Contentofascorbic acidin breastmilkand complem entaryfoodsgiven toinfants. 
• Ascorbicacidcontentinavarietyoffoods especiallycooked and processed fruitsand 
vegetables. 
• Studies on healthbenefits ofascorbicacidintheoccurrence ofchronic diseases and 
influenceon ageing. 
• Ascorbicacidstatus amo ng Malaysianpopulationaccording to agegroups using suitable 
biomarkersand possibly determinetheinfluence ofgenotypeon the plasmaascorbate 
concentration. 
• M etabolicstudiesto determine ascorbicacid requirement taking into accountfactors 
including gender,ageand smoking status. 
• Influenceofgenotypeon plasmaascorbate concentrationand biomarkers ofascorbate. 
231 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Ascorbic Ac id (VitaminC ) 
12.10 References 
Chang SK,IsmailA.andDaudZAM. (2016).Ascorbic Acid: P roperties,Determination andUses. 
In: Caballero,B.,Finglas,P .,and Toldrá,F.(eds.)The EncyclopediaofFood and H ealth. 
vol.1,pp.275-284.Oxford:Academ icP ress. 
D-A-CH (Deutsche Gesellschaftfur Er nahrung,O sterreichische Ges ellschaftfurErnagrung, 
SchweizerischeG esellschaftfurErnahrungsforschung,Schwe izerische V ereinigungfur 
E rnahrung)(2013).Re ferenzwe rtefurdieN ahrstoffzufuhr.Neu erU ms chauBu chverlag, 
Frankfurt/Main,Germany,292 pp. 
Daud ZAM ,IsmailA.and SarmadiB. (2016)AscorbicAcid:P hysiologyand He althEffects.In: 
Caballero,B .,Finglas,P .,and Toldrá,F.(eds.)The EncyclopediaofFood and Health. vol. 
1,pp.266-274.Oxford:Academic Press. 
Dehghan M, Akhtar-DaneshN, McM illanCR, Thabane L.(2007).Is plasm a vitamin C an 
appropriate biom arkerofvitam inC intake? A systematicreview andme ta-analysis.NutrJ 
6:41.DOI: 10.1186/1475-2891-6-41 
E FSA (2013).ScientificOp inion on Dietary Reference ValueforVitamin C. EFSA Journal11(11): 
3418:8-18.European Food SafetyAuthority 
F oo LH ,Khor GL ,Tee E S,and Pr abakaranD.(2004).Ironstatusand dietaryiron intake of 
adolescentsfrom aruralcomm unityin Sabah,Malaysia.AsiaPac J ClinNu tr 13(1):48- 
55. 
Fortmann SP ,B urda B U ,Senegr CA,Lin JS,Wh itlock E P .(2013) Vitam in and Mineral 
Supplements in the P rimaryPreven tionof CardiovascularDiseaseand Cancer: An 
U pdated Systematic Evidence R eview fortheU.S.Pr eventiveServices TaskF orce. An n 
Intern Med 159(12):824-834.DOI:10.7326/0003-4819-159-12-201312170-00729 
Ghasem zadeh A,Hawa Z.E. JaafarH, R ahmatA. (2010).AntioxidantActivities,TotalPhe nolics 
and Flavonoids Contentin Two VarietiesofMalaysiaYoung Ginger(Zingiber officinale 
R oscoe).Molecules 15:4324-4333;doi:10.3390/molecules15064324 
H allberg L (198 7)Wheat fiber,phytatesand iron absorption.Scand J G astroenterol(Suppl) 
129:73-79. 
H aniffJ,Das A,Lim TO ,Chen WS, Mohd No rdinN, Ram palS,Bah rinS,Ganeslingam M, 
Kularatnam KIK,Mohamad ZahirZM .(2007).AnemiainPregnancy inMalaysia:A Cross- 
SectionalSurvey.AsiaPac J ClinNutr; 16:527-536. 
IOM (2000).Ascorbicacid.In:D ietaryR eference Intakes forAscorbic acid,Vitamin E,Selenium, 
and Carotenoids. F ood and Nutrition Board,Institute ofMed icine.NationalAcademy 
P ress,WashingtonDC; chapter5,pp 95-185. 
232 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Ascorbic Ac id (Vitamin C) 
LevineM, Conry-CantilenaC,Wang Y,Welch RW, Washko PW ,DhariwalKR,P ark JB,Lazarev 
A & Graumlich JK (1996)Ascorbic acidpharmacokineticsinhealthy volunteers:evidence 
foraRecommended DietaryAllowance.Proc NatlAcad Sci93: 3704-3709. 
LevineM ,Rum sey SC,DhariwalKR ,Park J & Wang Y (1999 )Criteriaand recommenda tionfor 
ascorbic acidintake.J Amer Med Assoc 281:1415-1423. 
Levine M.,DhariwalKR,W elch RW ,W ang Y & Park JB (1995)Determ inationofoptim alascorbic 
acidrequirements in humans.Am J ClinNu tr 62:1347S-56S. 
Kamarudin N NI,ShaharS,Abd AzizNA, Yahya HM, Rajikan R. (2016).Wh ichaging group 
proneto hasinadequatenutrientintake?TU A study.Sains Ma laysiana 45(9):1381-1391. 
MirnalinaK,ZalilahM S,SafiahM Y,TahirA,SitiHaslindaMD, SitiRohanaD,KhairulZarinaMY , 
Mo hd H asyami S,No rmah H (2008).En ergy and N utrient Intakes: Findings from the 
MalaysianAdultNutritionSurvey(MAN S).Mal J N utr;14(1): 1-24. 
NationalCoordinating Commi ttee on F ood andNutrition.(2005).Re comme nded N utrientIntake 
(RN I).A R eportofthe TechnicalW orkingGroup on Nutrition Guidelines.NCC F N ,M inistry 
ofH ealth,P utrajaya. 
Ng uiR ,KinLC,Chuen CS,JaffarS.(2012).Associationbetween An aemia,Iron Deficiency 
Anaem ia,Neglected P arasiticInfections and 2012.Socioeconom ic Factors in Rural 
Children of West Malaysia. Plos Neglected Tropical Diseases. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0001550. 
Poh B K,Ng B K,SitiHas linda M D,Nik ShanitaS,Wong JE ,SitiBalkisB, R uzitaAT,N g LO , 
Khouw Iand Nor imahAK. (2013).N utritionalstatusand dietary intakes ofchildren aged 
6 mon ths to 12 years:findings ofthe N utritionSurvey ofMalaysianChildren (SEANUTS 
Malaysia).BritJ Nutr; 110,S21-S35doi:10.1017. 
SiesH & StahlW (1995)Vitamins E and C,beta-carotene,and othercarotenoidsas antioxidants. 
Am J ClinNutr; 62:1315S-1321S
Tee ES,Mohd IsmailN, Mohd NasirA & KahtijahI(1997).Nu trientCo mpo sitionofMalayisan 
Foods, 4th E dition,Ma laysian Foo d Comp ositionDatabase P rogramm e,Institute for 
MedicalRes earch,KualaLum pur;310p. 
Tee ES ,Khor GL,Ng TKW, Zaitun Y,Chee HL & SafiahMY (1998).Nutritionalassessment of 
ruralvillagesand estates in PeninsularMalaysia.III.Pr evalenceofanaemia.Mal J N utr 
4:1-29 .
TsaiAC & Chang TL (2011).The effectiveness of BMI, calfcircum ference and mid-arm 
circum ference in predicting subsequent mor tality risk inelderlyTaiwanese.Br J Nutr 
105(02):275-281.
233 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Ascorbic Ac id (VitaminC ) 
TsaiAC,ChangTL,Chen J T & YangTW (2009).Pop ulation-specificmo difications oftheshort- 
form MiniNutritionalAssessment and MalnutritionUniversalScreening Toolforelderly 
Taiwanese. Inter J Nursing Studies 46(11):1431-8. http://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijnurstu.2009.05.00
W H O /FA O (2004).VitaminC. In:Hum an Vitamin and M ineralReq uirements. R eportofaJoint 
WH O /FAO Expert Consultation.FAO ,R ome ;pp 73-86. 
W eberP ,Be ndich A & Schalch (199 6)Ascorbicacidand hum anhealth -areviewofrecentdata 
relevanttohum anrequirements. IntJ VitN utrR es 66:19-30. 
ZainuddinAA ,Foo LH ,N ur IbrahimAI,ArisT.(2017).Changes inenergy and nutrientintakes 
intheadultpopulation ofthe Malaysia:Findingsfrom MalaysianAdultNutritionSurvey 
(MA N S)2003-2014.Mal J Nutr (submitted). 
234 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Ascorbic Ac id (Vitamin C) 
M alaysia (20 17)* 
A ge group RNI (m g/day) 
W H O/ FA O (20 0 4) IOM (20 0 0 ) EFSA (20 13) 
A ppendix 12.1 C om parison ofrecom m ended intake forA scorbic A cid (Vitam in C ):RNIM alaysia (20 17),RNIofW H O/FA O (20 0 4),A Iand RDA ofIOM (20 0 0 ), 
and PRIofEFSA (20 13)
A ge group RNI (m g/day) A ge group A I (m g/day) A ge group PRI (m g/ day) 
Infants Infants Infants Infants 
0 -5m onths 25 0 -6 m onths 25 0 -6 m onths 40 
6 -12 m onths 30 7 -< 12 m onths 30 7 -12 m onths 50 7 -11 m onths 20 
RDA (m g/day) 
C hildren C hildren C hildren C hildren 
1 -3 years 30 1 -3 years 30 1 -3 years 15 1 -3 years 20 
4 -6 years 30 
4 -6 years 30 4 -6 years 30 4 -8 years 25 
7 -9 years 35 7 -9 years 35 7 -10 years 45 
Boys Boys Boys Boys 
10 -18 years 65 10 -18 years 40 9 -13 years 45 11 -14 years 70 
14 -18 years 75 15-17 years 100 
G irls G irls G irls G irls 
10 -18 years 65 10 -18 years 40 9 -13 years 45 11 -14 years 70 
14 -18 years 65 15-17 years 9 0 
235 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Ascorbic Ac id (VitaminC ) 
M en M en M en M en 
19 -65years 70 19 -65years 45 19 -30 years 9 0 19 -65years 1100 
> 65years 70 > 65years 45 31 -50 years 9 0 >65years 110 
51 -70 years 9 0 
> 70 years 9 0 
W om en W om en W om en W om en 
19 -65years 70 19 -65years 45 19 -30 years 75 19 -65years 9 5 
> 65years 70 > 65years 45 31 -50 years 75 
51 -70 years 75 
> 70 years 75 
Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy 
80 55 14 -18 years 80 105 
19 -30 years 85 
31 -50 years 85 
Lactation Lactation Lactation Lactation 
9 5 70 14 -18 years 115 155 
19 -30 years 120 
31 -50 years 120 
* R ecom m endations sam e as R N I2005(N CCF N ,2005) 
M alaysia (20 17)* 
A ge group RNI (m g/day) 
W H O/ FA O (20 0 4) IOM (20 0 0 ) EFSA (20 13) 
A ge group RNI (m g/day) A ge group A I (m g/day) A ge group PRI (m g/ day) 
236 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
13 • Vitam inA 
13.1 Introduction
Vitamin A isafat-solublevitamin obtained from thedieteitheraspreformed vitamin A 
(retinolandretinylesters)infoods ofanimaloriginorasaprovitamin A carotenoid (mainlybeta- 
carotene)inplant-derived foods,primarily in oils,fruitsand vegetables.Retinoliscomposed 
ofaβ-ionone ring,apolyunsaturated sidechainandapolarend group.This chem icalstructure 
makes itpoorlysoluble inwater but easily transferablethrough m emb rane lipid bilayers. 
Pr eform ed vitaminA consistspredominantlyofretinoland retinylesters,w hicharesuppliedin 
the dietby animal-derived products and the m ostabundantform s ofvitam in A in thebody. 
Retinolisatransportform and aprecursorofthetranscriptionallyactiveme taboliteall-trans- 
retinoicacid(EFSA ,2015).
13.2 Functions
Vitamin A performs m any functions in the body.It is an essentialm icronutrient 
throughout the lifecycle and is requiredfor vision,regulation of cellproliferation and 
differentiationand reproduction,especiallyforemb ryonic developmen t,grow th and tissue 
maintenance.Itisalso importantfor maintaining good nutritionalstatusforoptimalcognitive 
functioninelderly(WHO /FAO,2004;IOM, 2001).
A main function ofvitaminA isfor thenormalfunctioningofthevisualsystem.Re tinol 
istransportedto oculartissueand totheretinaofthe eye by intracellularbindingand transport 
proteininwhich itplaysan importantpartin theformationofrhodopsin,an importantvisual 
pigment,particularlyfor dim-light vision. All-trans retinolis converted to retinaldehyde, 
sum marizedto the11-cisform and bound to opsintoform rhodopsin.W hen thereisinsufficient 
amo untofretinolavailable,rhodopsin synthesisisaffectedand nightblindness m ayresult.The 
condition can,howev er,also be due to a lackof othernutrients wh icharecritical to the 
regenerationofrhodopsin such asproteinand zinc (WHO /FAO, 2004).
The second main function ofvitamin A isinthema intenance ofgrowth and epithelial 
cellularintegrityand immune functioninthebody.Thus,invitaminA deficiency,thenumber 
ofgobletcellsarereduced in epithelialtissues,resultinginareductioninmuc ous secretions 
with their antimicrobialcomponents . Cells lining protective tissue surfaces flatten and 
accumulatekeratinbecausetheyfailtoregenerate and differentiate.Allthese changes resultin 
diminishedresistance toinvasion by potentiallypathogenicorganisms.The immune system is 
alsoadverselyaffected by directinterference withproduction of som e types of protective 
secretionandcells.As thesechangesin internalepithelialtissues occur,theexternalreflections 
ofsuch changesare seen in the classicaleye changes inxerophthalmiaand xerosis(WH O/FA O, 
2004).
13.3 Metabolism 
The absorptionofboth preform ed vitam inA from animalsources (retinol)andprovitamin 
A com pounds from plantsources (mainly beta-carotene)occur m ainlyintheduodenum. The 
overallabsorptiveefficiencyofpreformed vitaminA ishigh(70%-to90%) and remainshigh 
asintakesincrease.O n the other hand,theabsorptionofbeta-carotene isonly40% to60%. 
237 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitam inA 
B eingfatsoluble,theabsorptionofbothvitamin A and provitaminA carotenoidsappearstobe 
dependent on theamount and type offatinthediet(EF SA,2015). 
The chylomicron,containingtheretinylesterstogetherwithsome intactbeta-carotene, 
leave the mucosal cellsthrough the lymphaticsystem and enter the systemic blood viathe 
thoracicduct.Allvitamin A com pounds,includingretinoicacidwhich passes intoportalblood 
directly,m eetintheliverwhere transformationssimilartothoseintheintestinalmucos alcells 
takeplace(EFS A,2015). 
The m ain storageform ofretinolisretinylesters.The liveristhema instorageorgan for 
vitam in A com pounds. While the liverand intestine arethe major tissue sites of retinol 
esterification,othertissuesincluding theeye,lung,adiposetissue,testes,skinand spleen are 
ableto esterifyretinoland accum ulateretinylesterstores.The enzyme responsibleformos t 
retinylesterformationis Lecitinretinolacyltransferase (LRA T).Inhealthyindividualswithan 
adequate vitaminA status,70%-90% retinolofthe body isstored intheliver.The efficiency of 
storagerepresents the fractionofingestedretinolwhich isabsorbed and retained inthebody 
(andm oreparticularlyintheliver).The efficiency ofstorage depends on vitamin A statuswhich 
isthe low retinolstoreareassociatedwithareduced efficiencyofstorage(EF SA,2015). 
O xidatively chain-shortenedproductsofvitamin A me tabolismareexcretedintheurine, 
w hilevitaminA products withintactchainsareexcretedinthebile. 
13.4 Sources
P reforme d vitamin A (retinol)isfound almostexclusively inanimalproducts.The vitamin 
A content of severalcommonl y consume d foods as obtainedfrom the MalaysianN utrient 
Compos ition Database(Tee etal., 1997) and USDA (2016)are summ arized below and inTable 
13.1.
Liver from various animals areextremely richsources ofretinol,containingup to as 
m uch as9,000µg and 16,000µg per 100g ofox liverand chicken liverrespectively.Meat of 
these animals,on the other hand,are generallyonlym edium sources,with levelsgenerally 
around 30µg/100 g ofme at,chicken,duck or mu tton.W holeegg isa very good source of 
vitaminA,w ith anestimatedcontentof350µg/100g.Mos tofthisvitamin isintheegg yolk,a 
100g ofw hichcontains about570µg retinol.F ish ingeneralarenotparticularlygood sources 
ofvitaminA,asonlyafew species containthevitaminataconcentrationof20-30(g/100g.
Severalprocessedfoodshavebeen fortified w ithvitamin A and are good sources ofthe 
vitamin.These include cornflakes,m altedmilkpow der and milkpow der.
Carotenoids,especially α-and β-carotenewhich are potentialprovitamin A precursors 
thatcan be converted intoretinol,are present in plantproducts,especially green leafy 
vegetables,red palm oiland yellow and orangefruitsand some tubers,eg sw eetpotato.Red 
palm oilis the richestnaturallyoccurring source ofβ-carotene and generallycontainsatotal 
of ~500-800m g of provitamin A carotenoids/kg oil,wh ich is ~15times higher thanthe 
carotenoidcontents ofcarrots on a weight-by-we ightbasis(Sundram ,Samba nthamurthi& 
Tan,2003).Carotenoidsarebiologically lessavailablethanretinolbut they aregenerallymore 
affordablethananimalfoods.Thus carotenoidsprovidem ostofthevitamin A activityinthediets 
oflowersocio-economic segments ofthepopulations.
Table 13.1 VitaminA contentoffoods 
238 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
VitaminA 
Food Category Vitam in A (µgRE/100g) 
Meat/ Poultry/Fish 
Chickenliver 16,000 
Ox/Beef liver 9,000 
Hen egg,whole 304 
Duck egg,whole 208 
Duck,thigh 69 
Chicken,thigh 50 
Mackarel,Indian(kembong) 8
Mackarel,Spanish (Tenggiri) 8
Fruits 
Mango 214 
Papaya 193 
Waterm elon 68 
Kundang (kemoir) 55 
Vegetables 
CekurMa nis (sweetleaf) 1620 
Red Capsicum 1510 
Kesum (laksaleaf) 1210 
Mam an (cleome gynandra) 960 
Carrot 835 
Tomato 700 
Processed Foods 
Cornflakes 812 
Malted milkpow der 767 
Fu llcream milkpow der 400 
Butter 200 
CheddarCheese 117 
Others 
Sweetpotatoes 709 
Source: Tee etal. (1997),USDA (2016) 
239 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitam inA 
13.5 Deficiencies 
The ma in sym ptom s observed incase ofdeficiency ofvitam in A are intrauterine and 
post-natalgrowthretardationand largearrayofcongenitalma lforma tions collectivelyreferred 
to asthe foetal‘vitamin A deficiency syndrome ’,which is we lldocume ntedin animals.Inadults, 
vitam in A deficiency adversely affectsseveralfunctions,such as vision,imm unity,and 
reproduction,and hasbeen relatedtothew orseningoflow iron status,resultinginvitamin A 
deficiencyanaemia. 
O cularma nifestations ofvitamin A deficiency (VAD),termed “xerophtalmia”or“dry eye” 
hasbeen recognizedforalongtime.The most frequentlyencountered ofthese signsisnight 
blindness,w hichistheearliestmanifestationofxerophthalmia.InVAD, the time requiredto 
regeneraterhodopsin is prolonged,thereby delaying adaptation time to dark environments. 
N ight-blindyoung childrentendto stumble whe n goingform brightto dimly-litareas and they 
tend toremaininactive atdusk and atnight.
V itaminA deficiencycanoccur aseitheraprimaryorasecondary deficiency.A primary 
vitamin A deficiency occursamong children and adultsw ho do notconsume anadequateintake 
ofprovitamin A carotenoidsfrom fruitsand vegetablesorpreformedvitaminA from animalsand 
dairy products.Secondary vitam inA deficiency isassociated w ithchronicm alabsorptionof 
lipids,impairedbile productionand release,and chronicexposure to oxidants(WHO /FAO , 
2004). 
There are severalbiochemicalme thods for estimating sub-clinicalvitamin A status, 
includingbreastmilk retinoland serum retinollevels,asw ellas percentrelativedose response 
and modifiedrelativedose response methods.These indicatorsare less specifictoV AD than 
clinicaleye signsandlesssensitiveforme asuringsub-clinicalvitaminA status.The biochemical 
indicator ofchoicefor population assessmentisthedistributionofserum levelofretinol.
V itamin A statuscan best be expressed in term s of totalbody pool of retinol or, 
alternatively,interms ofliverconcentration ofthevitamin.Hepa ticconcentrationisconsidered 
asam arkerofvitaminA status because70-90% oftheretinolinthe body isstored intheliver 
inhealthy individuals (WH O/FAO ,2004;EFSA, 2015).A m inimum concentration of 20 µg 
retinol/g liver(0.07µgm ol/g)asa criterion to defineadequatevitamin A statusas we llasto 
derivevitaminA requirements(IOM,2001;W HO/F AO, 2004;EF SA,2015). 
Pr ior to the 1950s,vitam inA deficiency inM alaysiaw asreported to be an important 
sight-threateningdisorder,affectingmainly young children on unbalanced diet,amongs tlower 
socio-economic segments ofthepopulation.Vitamin A intakewas generallylow,withlittleor 
no retinoland m ostofitfrom theprovitamins.Even then,theamount ofvegetablesand fruits 
consum ed were generallylow (Tee,1993).
N o exactestimates ofthemagnitudeoftheproblem in the countryarepresentlyavailable. 
H ow ever,asseen from reportsintheliterature,theproblem appears tobe confinedtocertain 
groups,mainlyinthe ruralareas,and does notpose a ma jorhealthhazard nationwide.The 
problem appearstohavelessened overtheyears,judgingfrom reportsup tothe1990s.There 
are probablyvery few casesofchildrenw itheye signspasttheconjunctivalxerosisand with 
serum vitamin A < 10(g/dl)(Tee,1993).
240 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
VitaminA 
Inanation-w idestudy of439 children under5years conducted by the MinistryofH ealth 
(M O H ,2000),only3.9% ofthechildrenwere foundtohavevitaminA deficiency (serum retinol 
< 0.7(mol/l).A study amo ng 350ruralelderlyMalaysalsoshowe d thattherew asno sub-clinical 
vitaminA deficiency(Suzana,1999). On the otherhand,a study of the problem amon gst 
undernourished preschoolchildrenincluded inthe nutritionrehabilitation program me in Sabah 
showe d thatsom e 30% ofthese children hadma rginalsub-clinicalvitaminA deficiency (serum 
retinol< 30(g/dl)(Tee etal., 1997).Inaclinicalstudyofaborigine children below 15years,a 
relatively high prevalence(64.3%)of ocularmanifestationof vitam in A deficiency.Night 
blindness was found in16.0%ofthechildren,conjunctivaxerosisin57.3%, Bitot’sspot in 
2.8%,cornealxerosisin 0.5%and cornealscarsin5.6%(Ngah etal., 2002).Itshouldthusbe 
recognised thatalthough the vitamin A deficiencyproblem m ay appearto be sma llinthe 
country,the problem can be serious amongst m alnourished children and und erserved 
communit ies.The currentstatus ofvitaminA among childreninthecountry isunclearasthere 
areno large scalerecentinvestigationsoftheproblem.
13.6 Factorsaffectingvitamin A requirements 
Generally,age and gender may affecttherequirements ofvitaminA.Children under 3 
yearsofageneed vitaminA tosupportearlyrapidgrowth which isthetransition period from 
breastfeeding to dependence on other dietary source ofvitamin and increased frequency of 
respiratory and gastrointestinalinfections.P regnantand lactatingwome n requireadditional 
vitaminA to supportmaternaland fetaltissuegrowth and lactation losses.Assum ing the 
efficiencyofm aternalvitamin A absorption toaverage70% and vitamin A tobe accumulated 
mostlyinthelast90 daysofpregnancy,thematernalrequirementwould be increasedduring 
the thirdtrimester (WHO /FAO, 2004;IOM, 2001).Similarly,lactating m others ma y require 
additionalvitaminA to m aintain vitamin A body storesofthemother.Considerationon whole 
body retinolstoresin thefoetusand on retinolsecretioninbreastm ilkcan be used toderive 
the additionalrequirement for,respectively,pregnantor lactating wo m en (E F SA,2015). 
BioavailabilityofthevitaminA isanotherfactoraffecting requirements.Bioavailability isthe 
proportionofaningestednutrientthatisavailableforutilization innormalphysiologicfunctions 
and forstorage.The bioavailabilityor preformed vitaminA is very high.More than 90% of 
retinoladded tofood asafortificantisabsorbed.
Dietaryfatplaysanim portantroleinthe absorptionofingested vitamin A.Dietary vitamin 
A isdigestedinmixed micelles and absorbedwithfat.There are indicationsthatincreasingthe 
leveloffatin alow fatdietcanimproveretinolandcaroteneabsorption.Particularlyforoptimal 
carotenoidabsorption,dietaryfatm ustbe consume d alongsidethese provitamin A compounds.
The ma trixofthe food affectstheabilityofcarotenoids to be releasedfrom food and 
thereforeaffects intestinalabsorption.F orexample,the riseinserum β-carotene concentration 
hasbeen observed tobe significantly lesswhen individualsconsum ed carrotsthanwhen they 
receivedthe same amountofthevitamin ofβ-carotenesupplement.The processingoffood also 
greatly affectsthe absorptionofcarotenoids.For instance,the absorption ofcarotene from 
slicedcarrotsw asmuch lower thanfrom homogenised carrot.Cookingofcarrotand spinach 
alsogreatlyimproved absorption.
241 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitam inA 
M alabsorption ofvitaminA canoccurw ithdiarrhoeaand intestinalinfectionssuch as in 
gastroenteritisand respiratoryinfections.Malabsorptionofthevitamin isalso associatedwith 
intestinalparasitism.
U nitsofexpression and conversionfactors 
In blood,tissuesand human milk,vitam inA levelsare conventionallyexpressed in(g/dl 
or (mol/lall-trans retinol.Most ofthecirculatingvitaminA isretinolwhe reasinmost tissues, 
secretionsand otheranimal food sourcesitexistsmainlyasretinylesters.
To expressthevitaminA activityofcarotenoidsindiets on acommon basis,F AO/W HO 
introduced the concept ofretinolequivalent (RE) and established the following relationship 
am ong food sources ofvitaminA: 
1 µg retinol = 1 RE 
1 µg β-carotene = 0.167µg RE, (1/6µg ) 
1 µg otherpro-vitaminA carotenoids = 0.084µg RE, (1/12µg) 
The U .S.InstituteofMedicine (IOM) hasintroduced anew term ,retinolactivity equivalent 
(RAE )to express the activityofcarotenoidsinterms ofV itam inA,to take into account new 
research on the V itamin A activity (bio-efficacy) of carotenoids (West et.al2002).IOM 
establishedthefollowingconversion factorequivalents: 
1 µg retinol = 1 µg RAE 
1 µg β-carotene inoil = 0.5µg RAE 
1 µg β-carotene inmixed foods = 0.083µg RAE 
1 µg otherpro-vitaminA carotenoidsin mixed foods = 0.042µg RAE 
H ow ever,usingthe new IOM conversion rates,populationindevelopingcountriesma y 
have difficulty to achieve adequacy (Clive,Ans & Machteld,2002).Based on the FAO/WHO 
(1988))conversionrates,allpopulations shouldbe abletomee ttheirvitaminA requirements 
from existingdietary sources.ThisTechnicalSub-Com mitteeon V itamins and The Scientific 
Com mittee for F ood (SCF, 19 93)for theEu ropean populations also decided to ma intainthe 
conversionfactorsthatuntilmore definitivedatabecome available.VitaminA requirement can 
be met withany m ixtureofpreforme d vitaminA carotenoids thatprovides an amountofvitamin 
A equivalenttothereferencevaluein terms ofµg RE/day. 
Ithasbeen stronglyrecommended thatweightor molarunitsreplace theuse ofIUto 
decrease confusion and overcome limitationsinthenon-equivalence oftheIUvalues forretinol 
and beta-carotenes.The conversionfactorstobe used are asfollows: 
1 IU retinol = 0.3µg retinol 
1 IU β-carotene = 0.6µg β-carotene 
1 IU retinol = 3 IUµ-carotene
242 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
VitaminA 
13.7 Settingrequireme nts and recomm ended intakeofvitaminA 
Vitamin A isan existingvitamin in theMalaysian R NI2005.At thattime,the Technical 
Sub-Commi ttee (TSC)on Vitamins found thattherewas no localdataon vitam in A requirem ents 
thatcould be used forarriving atRNI forthevitamin.The TSC thereforereferredtotheW HO/ F AO 
(2004)consultationreportand the IOM (2001)DRIrecomm endations.The rationaleand steps 
takeninsettingrequirements and the levelsrecomm ended by these organisationsas wellas 
availablereports ofvitamin A statusofcomm unitiesinthe country w ereconsidered.The TSC 
on Vitam insdecided toadaptthe WH O/FAO (2004)values astherevised 2005RNI forM alaysia.
The FA O /WHO internationalexpertconsultationhad used theterm “safelevelofintake” 
as itw as feltthatthe valuesarrived atdo not strictlycorrespond to the definition of a 
recom m ended nutrientintake.These safe levelsofintakearebasicallythesame asthoseinthe 
1988 FAO /WHO Expert Consultation(FAO /WHO ,1988).
The safelevelofintakeforan individualis definedastheaveragecontinuingintake of 
vitaminA requiredtoenableadequategrowth and permitothervitaminA-dependent functions 
to take place as wellasto m aintain anacceptabletotalbody reserveofthe vitamin.This reserve 
helps offsetperiods oflow intakeorincreasedneed resultingfrom infections and otherstresses.
Inreviewing the Malaysian R NI2017 forvitaminA,the TSC noted thattherew ereno large 
scalerecentinvestigations ofthevitamin A statusofcommunities inthecountry.Itwas also 
noted thattherehave been no updated versionsofrecommenda tionsofvitaminA intakefrom 
FAO /WH O consultationor the IOM DRIcommittee.The commi ttee howev er referred to the 
recentlypublishedreportoftheEuropean Food Safety Authorityon Dietary Reference V alues 
forvitaminA (EFS A,2015).
Upon reviewingallavailableinformation,theTSC Vitaminsdecidedtocontinuetoadopt 
the W HO /FAO (2004)recom me ndations forvitamin A intherevised MalaysiaRN I2017.The TSC 
feltthattherecom m endationintakessetby EFSA (2015)and IOM (2001)are toohighformen, 
wo me n and lactatingwomen andnotsuitabletobe adopted.The recom men dations ofW HO/FA O 
(2004)are deem ed as stillappropriateforMalaysians.Furthermore,withimprovem entin socio- 
economic status inthelast30years,ahigherpercentageofintakes ofvitamin A would be from 
animalsourcesascompared tothepast,where itwas derived mostlyfrom plantsources.
These recommendations forR NI2017,w hich are thesame as thepreviousRNI (NCC FN 
2005),are giveninboldin thefollowing paragraphs,accordingtoage groupsand summar ised 
inAppendix 13.1. 
243 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitam inA 
Infants 
N o functionalcriteriaofvitamin A status have been demonstrated thatreflectresponse 
to dietary intakeininfants.Thus recommende d intakes ofvitamin A arebased on anadequate 
intakethatreflectsacalculatedm eanvitaminA intake ofinfantsprincipallyfed human milk.
During thefirst6 months oflife,exclusive breast-feedingis known toprovidesufficient 
vitamin A to maintainhealth,permitnormalgrowth and maintainsufficientstoresintheliver. 
The safe levelofintakeforinfantsup to6 months ofage iscalculated based on observations 
ofbreast-fedinfantsingenerally healthycom munities.The averagebreastmilkconsumption 
is about750ml/day.The average concentration ofvitamin A in human m ilkisabout1.75µmol/l 
(range,0.70-2.45µmol/l).Thus mean daily intake would then be about 375µg R E, which is 
takenastherecommended safe level.
For the second halfofinfancy,hum anmilkintake averages 650ml which w ouldprovide 
325µg vitaminA daily.Inordertoreduce risk todeath from 6 mont hs onwards,especiallyin 
endem icvitaminA-deficientpopulations,therecomme nded safeintake isincreased to400µg 
(W H O /FAO,2004).On theotherhand,theaverageintake ofvitamin A required forinfantsaged 
7-11 m onthstomaintainaconcentrationof20 µg retinol/g liver,but withvaluesfor reference 
body weightand liver/body w eightration specific toinfants,whichis250µg/day(E FSA,2015).
RNI forinfants 
0 -5 m onths 375 µg RE/day 
6 -11 m onths 400 µg RE/day 
Children and adolescents 
For older children,the recommended intakes w ere estima ted from those derived from 
infancy,i.e.39 µg RE/kg body weight/day.Pr ovidingforallowances forstorage requirements 
and variability,thesafe intakefor children 1-9 yearswas estimated torange from 400-500µg 
perday.The safeintake foradolescentswas stepped up from thatforchildren.B esidesthat,for 
children up to14 yearsofaged,itisthesame values w ithinfantstom aintainaconcentration 
of20 µg retinol/gliver,thatis 250µg/day.Itw asconsidered unnecessarytogivesex-specific 
valuesfor infantsand childrenup to14 years ofaged (E FSA ,2015). 
RNI forchildren 
1 -3 years 400 µg RE/day 
4 -6 years 450 µg RE/day 
7 -9 years 500 µg RE/day 
RNI foradolescents 
Boys 10 -18 years 600 µg RE/day 
G irls10 -18 years 600 µg RE/day 
244 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
VitaminA 
Adultsand elderly 
Estimates for the recom me nded safeintakesforadults arealsoobtained from those 
derived from late infancy,i.e.9.3 µg/kgbody weight/day.The levels recom me nded are 
essentially thesame asthosemade during theFAO/WHO expertconsultation1988 as thegroup 
feltthatthere w ere no new published studiesto indicatea need to revise the assumptions 
previouslymade. The safe intakesrecom mended aresaidtobe consistentw iththepercapita 
vitamin A contentin the food supply ofcountriesthatshow adequate vitamin A statusinall 
sectors ofthe population.
The FA O/WHO consultation feltthatthere was no indication that the vitamin A 
requirement ofhealthyelderlyindividualsdifferedfrom thoseofotheradults.Itshould however 
be borne in mind thatthe elderlyaremo recom monly affectedby severaldiseaseconditions that 
impede vitamin A absorption,storage,and transportwhich hence affectedtheirrequirements 
forthevitamin.
The E FSA Panel2015determines the Ade quate Req uireme nt(AR) forvitaminA inhealthy 
adultsasthe vitaminA intakerequiredto m aintainaliverretinolconcentrationof20µg/g(0.07 
µmol/g).Assuming a CV of 15% because ofthe variability in requirementand of the large 
uncertaintiesinthe dataset,P opulation Reference Intakes(P RIs)of750µg RE/day form en and 
650µg RE/dayforwom en areset. 
RN I foradults 
Men 19 -65 years 600 µg RE/day 
Women 19 -65 years 600 µg RE/day 
RN I forelderly 
Men > 65 years 600 µg RE/day 
Women > 65 years 600 µg RE/day 
Pregnancy and Lactation 
Duringpregnancy,additionalvitaminA isneeded forthegrowth and maintenanceofthe 
foetusfor providingalimited reserveinthefoetalliverand formaternaltissue growth.There 
are no reliable figures available forthespecificvitaminA requirementsfor these processes. 
R ecognisingthata largeportion of the world’spopulation of pregnantwo men live under 
conditionsofdeprivation,theFAO /WHO expertconsultationrecommende d thatthesafelevel 
forwome n be raised by 300µg,bringing itto 800µg RE perday.The Consultationalso pointed 
outthatwom en w ho areor who mightbecome pregnantshouldcarefullylimittheirtotaldaily 
vitaminA intaketo amaximum of3000µg RE to minimiseriskoffoetaltoxicity.
245 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitam inA 
If the amounts of vitaminA recomm ended for infants aresuppliedby hum an milk, 
m others shouldabsorb atleastasm uch in theirdiets to replace m aternallosses.Thus,an 
am ount of350µg was recom mended tobe added tothesafeintake for w omen, bringingthe 
totalduring lactation to850µg R E. IOM 2001recomme nded intake forpregnantand lactating 
adolescentsare750µg R E/dayand 1200µg R E/day,respectively. 
The EFSA P anel2015assumes thatatotalamount of3600µg retinolisaccum ulatedin 
the foetus overthecourse ofpregnancy.Consequently,an AR of540µg RE/day isestimated 
for pregnantwom en by adding the additionalrequireme nt ofpregnancy to the AR for non- 
pregnantnon-lactating women androunding.Considering aCV of15%,aPRI of700µg RE/day 
isderivedfor pregnantwomen. For lactatingwomen, based on an average amount ofretinol 
secreted in breastmilk of424 µg/dayand considering aCV 15%,aPRI of1300µg RE/day is 
proposed forlactating women. 
RNI for 
Pregnancy 800 µg RE 
Lactation 850 µg RE 
D iscussions on revisedRNI for Malaysia 
The proposed 2017 RN IvaluesforvitaminA for M alaysia,adapted from WHO/FAO 
(2004),are alsothe same asthose adoptedby theW orkingGroup fortheH armonisationof 
RDA s inSE Asia(Tee & F lorentino,2005).InthisrevisedRNI forM alaysia(2017),the proposed 
recommen ded intakes retainsame corresponding values to those ofRN I(2005).Append ix 11.1 
providesasum mary oftherevised RN I(2017),compared w ith theRNI (2005),EFSA (2015), 
the WH O/FA O (2004)recomm endationsand thevaluesrecomm ended by IOM (2001).
The levelsforinfantsaresimilarwiththose recomme nded by IOM (2001),buttheEFS A 
(2015)recomme ndationsarelowerforthis agegroup.O n theotherhand,therecomme ndation 
intakesby IOM (2001)and EFSA (2015)arehigherforadolescent,men, wome n and lactating 
w omen. IOM (2001)valuesrecommended foradultsare higherthanthose recommende d by 
W H O /FAO (2004),probablydue tothe largebody sizeofAme ricans.
13.8 Tolerableupper intakelevels 
Be ing a fat-soluble vitamin,retinolcan be stored inthe hum an body,prim arily inthe 
liver.Thus longterm regularconsum ptionoflargeamounts ofthevitaminA can resultintoxic 
sym ptoms.These sym ptoms arevaried and non-specificand includecentralnervous system 
effects,liverdam age,bone abnormalities andjointpain,alopecia,headaches and vomitingand 
skindesquamation.Rarely does toxicityoccurfrom ingestingfood sources ofpreform ed vitamin 
A.When thisoccurs,itusually resultsfrom very frequent consump tion of liverproducts 
(W HO /FAO ,2004).Acu tetoxicity ischaracterised by nausea,vom iting,headache,increased 
cerebrospinalfluidpressure,vertigo,blurredvision,m uscularincoordinationand bulgingfrontal 
ininfants(IOM,2001).
246 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
VitaminA 
Infants,including newborns,administered single doses equivalentto 15,000and30,000 
µg retinolinoilgenerally show no adversesymptoms. Dailyprophylaticor therapeuticdoses 
shouldnotexceed 900 µg.Most children1-6yearsofagetoleratesingleoraldoses of60,000 
µg vitamininoilatintervals of4-6months withoutadversesymptoms .
When takenby wom en atearlystagesofgestationatdailylevelsofmore than7500µg, 
foetalanom aliesand poor reproductive outcomes have been reported.Wo me n wh o are 
pregnantor mightbecome pregnantshouldavoidtakingexcessiveamounts ofvitaminA.The 
WH O expertgroup recommended thatdailyintakesinexcess of3,000µg or we eklyintakesin 
excess of7,500µg shouldnotbe takenatanyperiodduringgestation.
The TolerableUpper IntakeLevel(UL)isthehighestlevelofdailyvitaminA intake that 
islikely to pose no risk ofadverse healtheffectsinalmost allindividuals.Memb ers of the 
generalpopulation should be advised not to routinelyexceed the U L.Fo r the purposes of 
derivingataUL,threeprimaryadverseeffectsofchronicvitamin A intake are: reduced bone 
mineraldensity,teratogenecityand liverabnormalities.The ULs recom mende d by IOM (2001) 
areslightlydifferentfrom thoseofFAO /WHO and areasgiven in Table13.2.
Table 13.2 TolerableUpper Intake(UL)levels ofvitamin A forvarious age groups 
A ge groups µg/day ofpreform ed vitam in A 
Infants 600 
Children 
1-3 years 600 
4-8 years 900 
9-13years 1,700 
Adolescents, 14-18years 2,800 
Women, ≥ 19 years 3,000 
Men, ≥19 years 3,000 
Pregnantw omen 2,800 
Lactatingw omen 2,800 
Source: IOM (2001) 
247 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitam inA 
13.9 Researchrecommendations
The followingpriorityareasofresearch arerecommend ed:
• Dataon dietaryintake of vitaminA am ong different com m unity groups,particularly 
children and w omen, both interms ofamounts ofvitamin A and carotene-rich foodsas 
w ellastheam ountsofretinolconsumed.
• Comprehensive study ofvitamin A statusofpre-schoolers usingbiochemicalindicators 
especially amongst comm unities oflower socio-economic status.
• Studies on health benefitsofcarotenoids,eg lycopene,zeaxanthininlocalfruits and 
vegetables/ulam.
• Bioavailabilityofprovitamin A comp ounds offood sources. 
• Effectofprocessing on bioavailabilityofvitaminA and provitaminA compounds.
• EffectofvitaminA status on immun e functionofchildren. 
248 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
VitaminA 
13.10 References 
CliveE.We st ,Ans Eilander and Mac hteldvan Leishout(2002).Con sequences of Rev ised 
Estimatesof CarotenoidB ioefficacy forDietaryControlof Vitamin A Deficiency in 
Developing Country.J Nutr.132:2920S-2926S. 
Eu ropean F ood SafetyAuthority(2015).ScientificOpinion on Dietary R eference Values for 
VitaminA.E FSA Panelon Dietetic Products,Nutrition,and Allergies (ND A).EFSA Journal 
201;13(3):4028. 
FAO /WH O (1988).Requirements ofVitaminA, Iron,Folateand Vitamin B12. Re portofaJoint 
FAO /WH O Expert Consultation.FAO ,Rom e.
IOM (2001).Vitamin A.In:DietaryR eferences Intakes forVitamin A,Vitamin K,Arsenic,Boron, 
Ch romium ,Copper,Iodine,Iron,Manganese, Mo lybdenum, N ickel,Silicon,Vanadium 
and Zinc. Fo od and N utrition B oard,Institute ofM edicine.NationalAcadem y P ress, 
WashingtonDC ;pp 82-161.
MO H (2000).Hema globinand serum retinollevelamongstchildrenunder5yearsofage.Re port 
of a MOH-U NICEF study.Divisionof Fam ily Health Developm ent,M inistry of Health 
Malaysia,KualaLum pur.
Ngah MF ,MoktarN ,IsaNH ,SelvarajS,YusofMS,SaniHA, Hasan ZA and KadirRA (2002). 
Ocular m anifestationofvitamin A deficiency among Orang Asli(Aborigine)children in 
Malaysia.Asia PacificJ ClinNutr 11(2):88-91. 
SCF (1993).),Nutrient and Energy Intakes for the European C omm unity. Reports of the 
ScientificCom mittee for Food, 31stSeries.Fo od-Science and Technique,E uropean 
Comm ission,Luxembourg. 248pp. 
Sundram K,Samban thamur thiR ,TanYA: Palm FruitChem istryand N utrition.AsiaPacific J Clin 
Nu tr 12:355-362,2003. 
SuzanaS(199 9).Dietary and biochemicalnutritionalstatusofruralelderlyM alays.IntJ VitN utr 
Res 69(4):277-284. 
Tee ES (1993).Micronutrientdeficiencies.In:NutritioninMa laysia:Assessment,An alysisand 
Action. Tee ES and Cavalli-SforzaLT (eds).Malaysia CountryPaper forthe FAO /WHO 
InternationalConfererence inNu trition,InstituteforM edicalResearch,KualaLumpu r;pp. 
15-45. 
Tee ES,IsmailM N, Mohd N asirA and KhatijahI(1997).NutrientComp osition ofMalaysian 
Foods. 4th E dition.Ma laysian Foo d Comp ositionDatabase P rogramm e,Institute for 
MedicalRes earch,KualaLum pur;310p.
Tee ES,Ng TKW, KhorSC,PuspawatiM, SharirahZ (1997).Vitamin A deficiency and anaem ia 
amo ng undernourished preschoolchildreninSabah. Pos terpresented attheRese arch 
DialogueSession oftheMinistryofHealthMalaysia,1 July1997,KualaLumpur. 
249 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitam inA 
Tee ES and FlorentinoRF (2005).Recom me nded Dietary Allowances: H armonizationin 
SoutheastAsia,ILSI,SEA Region M onographSeries,Singapore. 
U SDA (2016).National NutrientDatabase forStandard Re ference, R elease28 (2016).U S 
Departm ent of Ag riculture,AgriculturalR esearchService,Nut rient Data Laboratory. 
V ersion Current:September 2015:http://www.ars.usda.gov 
W H O /FAO (2004).V itamin A.In: Vitaminand M ineralReq uirements inHu man N utrition (2nd 
E dition).Repo rtofa JointF AO/W HO Ex pertConsultation,Wo rld H ealthO rganization, 
G eneva,pp 17-44.
250 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
VitaminA 
M alaysia (20 17)* 
A ge group RNI 
(µgRE/day) 
EFSA (20 15) W H O/FA O (20 0 4) IOM (20 0 1) 
A ppendix 13.1 C om parison ofrecom m ended intake forVitam in A :RNI M alaysia (20 17),EFSA (20 15),“safe intake” ofW H O/FA O (20 0 4)A I and 
RDA ofIOM (20 0 1) 
A ge group PRI 
(µgRE/day) A ge group Safe intake 
(µgRE/day) A ge group A I 
(µgRE/day) 
Infants Infants Infants Infants 
0 -5m onths 375 0 - 6 m onths 375 0 -6 m onths 400 
6 -12 m onths 400 7 -11 m onths 250 7 -12 m onths 400 7 -12 m onths 500 
RDA (µgRE/day) 
C hildren C hildren C hildren C hildren 
1 -3 years 400 1 -3 years 250 1 -3 years 400 1 -3 years 300 
4 -6 years 450 4 -6 years 300 4 -6 years 450 4 -8 years 400 
7 -9 years 500 7 -10 years 400 7 -9 years 500 
Boys Boys Boys Boys 
10 -18 years 600 11 -14 years 600 10 -18 years 600 9 -13 years 600 
15-17 years 750 14 -18 years 9 00 
G irls G irls G irls G irls 
10 -18 years 600 11 -10 years 600 10 -18 years 600 9 -13 years 600 
15-17 years 650 14 -18 years 700 
251 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitam inA 
M alaysia (20 17)* 
A ge group RNI 
(µgRE/day) 
EFSA (20 15) W H O/FA O (20 0 4) IOM (20 0 1) 
A ge group PRI 
(µgRE/day) A ge group Safe intake 
(µgRE/day) A ge group A I 
(µgRE/day) 
M en M en M en M en 
19 -65years 600 > 18 750 19 -65years 600 19 -30 years 9 00 
> 65years 600 > 65years 600 31 -50 years 9 00 
51 – 70 years 9 00 
> 70 years 9 00 
W om en W om en W om en W om en 
19 -65years 600 > 18 650 19 -65years 500 19 -30 years 700 
> 65years 600 > 65years 600 31 -50 years 700 
51 -70 years 700 
> 70 years 700 
Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy 
800 700 800 14 -18 years 750 
19 -30 years 770 
31 -50 years 770 
Lactation Lactation Lactation Lactation 
850 1300 850 14 -18 years 1,200 
19 -30 years 1,300 
31 -50 years 1,300 
*R ecom m endations sim ilarto R N I2005 
R E -R etinolE quivalents 
252 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
14 • Vitamin D 
14.1 Introduction 
VitaminD or calciferolisa fat-soluble vitam in.Itcan existin2 isoform s wh ichisD2 
(ergocalciferol)and D3 (cholecalciferol).V itaminD2 is mostlyhuma n-m ade and added tofoods. 
Vitamin D3issynthesized in theskinfrom 7-dehydrocholesterol.The vitamin D3 synthesiscan 
be activated w iththe exposureofbareskintosunlight.VitaminD3 can alsobe obtained from 
thedietviatheintake ofanimal-basedfood.Both D2 and D3 are synthesised commer ciallyand 
found in fortified foods anddietary supplements.VitaminD3 isreported to havehigherstability 
inblood com paredtovitamin D2 due tothehigher abilityofbindingproteintowardsvitamin 
D3. 
The D2 and D3forms differonly intheirside chainstructureofthechemicalcompound. 
The differences do notaffectmetabolism/activationand bothforms functionasprohormones. 
When activated,the D2 and D3 forms havebeen reportedto exhibitidenticalresponses inthe 
body.Itwas reported thatthe specific potency related tothe ability to curevitam inD-deficiency 
rickets isthe same between both isoforms(Jones,Strugnell,& DeLUC A,1998; Jurutkaetal., 
2001). 
14.2 Functions
The dom inantfunction of V itaminD inits horm onal/activeform (calcitriolor 1,25- 
dihydroxyvitaminD) iswith the skeletalsystem.The main biologicalfunction is to m aintain 
norm alblood levelsofcalciumand phosphorus.These minerals are importantforthenormal 
mineralizationprocessofthebone (Holick,1996).VitaminD also regulates thetranscriptionof 
a numbe r ofvitamin D-dependentgenes coding forcalcium transporting proteins and bone 
matrixproteins.Fu rthermore,theelevation ofplasmacalciumto normallevelsisalsorequired 
forthe functioningofthe neurom uscularjunctionasw ellasvasodilatation,nerve transm ission, 
and horm onalsecretion. 
Itis noteworthy thatthe vitamin D receptor(VDR )ispresent inthenucleus ofmany 
tissues thatarenot involved inthe regulation of calciumand phosphate m etabolism.F or 
example,theV DR hasbeen clearlydescribedin epidermalkeratinocytes,inactivatedT cellsof 
the imm une system,in antigen-presenting cells,in macrophages and m onocytes,and in 
cytotoxicT cells. 
He nce,w iththe discovery ofVDR on non-skeletaltissue systems,a large number of 
research has been focused atthe non-skeletalchronicdisease outcomes such as diabetes, 
cancer,cardiovasculardisease and met abolicsyndrome. H owever, after extensive and 
compr ehensivereviewofliterature,the Institute ofMedicine(IOM,2011)concluded thatthe 
causality was inconsistentand inconclusiveand therew asinsufficientevidenceon thenon- 
skeletalchronicdisease outcom es toserveasabasisforthedevelopme ntofDietaryRe ference 
Intake(DRI)ofvitamin D.H olick etal. (2011)performed ame ta-analysisand ma de ascientific 
statementstatingthatalthoughmany observationalstudieshaveidentifiedlinks ofvitaminD 
with severalchronic diseases,but these have neither been evaluated nor replicated in 
randomisedcontrolledtrials and in anycohortstudies.
253 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin D 
14.3 M etabolism 
V itamin D maintainsserum calcium levelsby three different m echanisms. The first 
m echanism,w hichdoes notrequireparathyroidhormon e (P TH),isthew ell-established roleof 
vitam inD instimulatingintestinalcalcium absorption throughout the entire length of the 
intestine,w ithitsgreatestactivityinthe duodenum and jejunum.Inthesecond m echanism, 
vitaminD playsanessentialrolein themob ilisationofcalciumfrom bone,aprocess requiring 
P TH (Garabedian et al.,1972; Lips,2006).Itinduces the form ation and activationof the 
osteoclasttofunction in themo bilisation ofcalciumfrom bone.In thethird m echanism,vitamin 
D together w ith P TH stimulatesthe renal distaltubule reabsorption of calcium, ensuring 
retention ofcalcium by the kidney wh en calcium is needed (Sutton& Lazarus,1976;Yamamoto 
et al.,1984).Through the V DR ,vitamin D suppresses parathyroid gene expression and 
parathyroidcellproliferation,providing impo rtantfeedback loops thatreinforce thedirectaction 
ofincreasedserum calcium levels(Silveretal.,1986; Slatopolskyetal.,1984). 
14.4 Sources
DietaryvitaminD canbe obtained from three sources,nam elynaturalfood,fortified food 
and supplements.Thereareafew naturally occurring food sourcesofvitam inD which includes 
fattyfish(salmon,tuna,sardine,herring,mac kerel),cod liveroiland egg yolk(USDA,2016). 
M eat,poultryand vegetablesaregenerallypoor sources ofthevitamin.Dairyproductsare fair 
sourcesofvitamin D.O therpossiblesources ofvitaminD are from fortified foods which are 
m ade availableon avoluntarybasisby manufacturers.Com merc ially,vitaminD isfortifiedin 
cereals,bread,butterand yoghurt.B everages such asm ilkand soy milkare alsofortifiedwith 
vitam in D. In Malaysia,the MalaysianFoo d R egulation perm its the addition of vitaminD 
according to different categories of foods (M OH ,198 5).Currently,voluntary vitaminD 
fortificationofmilkpowder forchildren and adultsare beingcarried outby manufacturers.The 
intakeoffoodsfortifiedwithvitamin D canincrease vitamin D inthediet.
In recentyears,vitamin D dietary supplements eithercombined only withcalcium or 
w ith mu ltivitamin/m ulti-mineralform ulations have become mor e common and have been more 
frequentlyconsumed. G enerally,theform ofvitamin D used insupplementproductscan be 
either from vitamin D2 or vitaminD3 com pound.H owever,the industry is switching from 
vitam in D2 to D3.Some manufacturersarealso found to produce vitam in D withhigher 
concentration.Traditionally,many marketeddietary supplements contain400IU(10ug)per 
dailydose (IOM, 2011).Directsunlightexposure totheskinisalso agood source toachieve 
optimum levelofvitaminD.VitaminD contentoffoodsisgiveninTable14.1.
254 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Vitam inD 
Table 14.1.VitaminD contentoffoods
Food Vitam in D µg/100g 
Poultry,M eat,Fish 
Fish,salmon,pink 10.9 
Fish,mackerel,cooked 7.3 
Fish,sardines,cooked 4.8 
Egg, whole 2.0 
Beef,liver 1.2 
Fish,catfish,farmed 0.2 
Beef,Meat 0.1 
Chicken,M eat 0.1 
Lamb,m eat 0.1 
Dairy 
Milk,cow fortified,low fat 1.3 
Yogurt,fortified,low fat 1.2 
Cheese,cheddar 1.0 
Vegetables 
Mushroom, oyster 0.7 
Potatoes,mashed 0.3 
Source: USDA ,(2016)-1 ug = 40IU 
14.5 Deficiencies
Vitamin D deficiencyis m anifested asrickets inchildren and as osteomalaciainadults. 
Lackofthe vitamininadultsm ayalso contribute tothe development ofosteoporosis.Higher 
prevalenceofvitamin D deficiencyhasbeen found among females compa red tomales(Moy & 
Bulgiba,2011).Infantsarethegroup most atriskofdeficiency invitamin D simplybecause of 
theirhighrateofskeletalgrowth.Although atbirth,vitaminD isacquired inutero,thestores 
willonly be sufficientfor the firstmo nth oflife.Intempe rate countries,infantsborn inthe 
autumn m onths areespecially atrisk because they spend the firstsixm onths of theirlife 
indoors.Therefore,theyhavelessopportunityto synthesisevitaminD intheirskinduringthis 
period.
Intheelderly,clinicalresearch studieshave suggestedagerelated declineinma ny key 
steps of vitamin D action (Holick,1994 ).This included rate of skin synthesis,rate of 
hydroxylationleading toactivationtothe hormonalform,and response oftargettissues (bone) 
as wellasreduced skin exposure.Some studieshaveindicatedthatthereappearstobe vitamin 
deficiencyina subsetofelderly populationacrosstheglobe (Chapuy,Me unier,& Feldm an, 
1997).Kok-Yong etal. (2016)reported theprevalenceofosteoporosisamong elderlyinKuala 
Lumpur as10.6%in m alesand 8.0%in females,respectively.A few groups have found that 
moder ateincreasesinvitamin D intakes(10to 20 µg/day)reduce the rate ofbone loss and 
255 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin D 
fractures (Chapuy et al., 1997; Dawson-H ughes et al., 19 9 1).These results were used as 
evidence by IOM (2011)to recomm end an increase invitamin D intakes fortheelderlyto a 
value(10-15(g/day)thatisableto maintain normalvitaminD levels.
Since early year2000,there hasbeen a significantincrease in researchpublications 
relatedto vitamin D in Malaysia.Currently,dataon severallifestages show highprevalence of 
vitamin D deficiency amo ng adultsand children inMalaysia.Appendix14.1show s thesum mary 
ofvitaminD researchfindings inMalaysia.Itisnoteworthythatseveraldifferentcut-offvalues 
w ere used by therespectiveresearchers.Furthermor e,varied me thodologies w ere used thus 
possiblyincreasing the variabilityinfindings.The cut-offvalues and laboratorymethods in 
detectingserum vitamin D hasbeen a populartopic ofdebate amo ng researchers.Perh aps, 
these have been translatedintotheweak clinicalevidence on non-skeletalsystem defecteven 
w iththe presenceofvitamin D insufficiency or deficiency in severalpopulationstudies.
14.6 Factorsaffectingvitamin D requirements 
Technically,individualsliving neartheequator(sunny regions)couldachieveoptimum 
25OH D in serum from theactivationofsun lighton theskin.Howe ver,thisisnotthecase as 
m ajority ofindividualssuch ashousewives officeand sedentary personsspend most oftheir 
day indoor.Other situations thatw illresultinreduced sunlightexposure include the use of 
sunscreenandculturalclothing cover-up.Darkerskin also reduces skin synthesis ofpre-vitamin 
D inresponse to sunlightexposure.Darker-skinned peoplemay requirelongersunlightexposure 
than light-skinnedpeople.Itis noteworthythatallthegroups above do notrequirevitaminD 
inexcess ofthe RN Ibecause recommendat ionhasbeen setwiththeassumption ofminimal 
sunlightexposure.
Acrossallagegroups,obese individualswe re alsofound tohave lower serum vitamin 
D levelcom paredtoindividualswithnormalweight.One ofthemain reasons could be due to 
the sequestrationofthe fat-solublevitamin D into adipose tissue.Howe ver,the IOM (2011)did 
not recomm end higherrequirement ofvitamin D among thisgroup due tolack ofconclusive 
and beneficialevidenceElderlyperson’spoor dietand low outdooractivities pluspoor health 
conditionm ayalsolead tohigherrequirementforvitaminD among thisvulnerableagegroup. 
H ighestrequirementacrossagegroup is setby IOM (2011)forelderlyperson. 
The latitude,mo nsoon season and time of day can affectvitamin D synthesis.The 
ultravioletrays thatpromote vitamin D synthesisareblocked by heavyclouds,smok e orsmog. 
H ence,thechangeofatmospheric environme ntshouldbe monitored w ithcaution.
B estfoods to obtainvitamin D from thedietarefrom animalsource such assalmon, 
tuna,sardine,herring,mackerel,liver and egg yolk.These foods are not consumed by 
vegetarians.Po ssible plant-based food source for vitamin D is from m ushroom. H ence, 
individualspracticing vegetarianism shouldtrytoachieve optimum activationofserum vitamin 
D from sunlight,from vitaminD fortified foodsand possiblysupplements. 
256 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Vitam inD 
14.7 Settingrequireme nts and recomm ended intakeofvitaminD 
Vitamin A is an existing vitamin in the M alaysian RN I2005.In m aking the 
recom mendationforvitamin D intakethen,therewas no localdataon vitamin D requirements 
thatcouldbe used by theTechnicalSub Committee (TSC)on vitamin.The RN IM alaysia(2005) 
referred to the WH O/FAO (2004)consultation report as well as the IOM (199 7) DRI 
recomm endations.These organisations had m ade the sam e recom m ended intakes forthe 
vitam in.The rationaleandstepstakenin settingtherequireme ntsand the levels recomme nded 
by theseorganisationswere considered.The TSC on Vitaminsagreed toadapttheW HO /F AO 
(2004)valuesasthe R NIfor Malaysia2005.
Inpreparing for the2017reviewoftheRNI forvitamin D,theTSC on vitaminssourced 
forrecentrecomm endations ofthevitamin by internationalresearch organisations.Itwas noted 
thatWHO/F AO has not updated their2004 recomm endations. There were no other new 
publishedreports on vitaminD recomm endationsexceptby IOM (2011).Itwas alsonotedthat 
theEur opean Food and SafetyAuthorityproduced ascientificopiniondrafton DRIforVitamin 
D (EFS A,unpublished)which recommends similarRNI asIOM (2011).Thus,theTSC referred 
onlytotheIOM (2011)DR Irecommendations asithasthelatestpublished recommendations 
on Vitamin D. The rationaleand steps taken in settingthe requirements and the levels 
recom men ded by IOM (2011)and availablereportson vitaminD status ofcomm unitiesin 
Malaysiawere considered.The TSC on vitaminsagreed toadapttheIOM (2011)valuesas the 
revisedR NIforM alaysia,giveninboldin thefollowingparagraphsaccordingto agegroup and 
summar isedinAppendix14.2. 
The IOM (2011)consideredminimalsun exposureinderivingtheDRI.Thisconditionis 
not differentw iththesun exposure situationinMalaysiaeven w iththeavailabilityofsunlight 
almostthroughoutthe year.Thisism ainly due to sunlightavoidance practice related tothe heat 
ofsunlightamong Malaysian.Thisisevident from alocalstudyw hich found minimalsunlight 
exposure and highsun lightavoidance practiceam ong Malaysians(Moy & Bulgiba,2011). 
Occupationalsoplays animportantrolesasastudycompared vitaminD levelbetween indoor 
and outdoor w orkers(Hami d Jan& N orliyana,2016)indicatinghigher serum vitamin D level 
among outdoorwo rkerscompared to indoor workers.Holicks (2002)reported thatthe best 
timeforsunlightactivationofvitaminD isduringthenoon astheUVB radiationisatpeak.In 
countriesneartheequatorlike Malaysia,this isalsothetimewhen theheatisatthehighest 
level.He nce,thiscould be the main reasonforsun avoidancepracticeamo ng ma jorityof 
Malaysians.
A localstudy hasshown thatw ith minimum surface exposure(face andhand)tosunlight 
for30minutes,2 times perweek at11am couldincrease40% ofserum vitamin D (Hamid Jan 
& Nor liyana,2016).However ,cautionshouldbe made by individualswho have sensitiveskin 
toheatfrom sunlightasitmay causeskinirritation.The aboveme ntionedstudyalso reported 
similareffectam ong participantswho took50,000IU (1250ug)(1 vitaminD per week for3 
months.Indicating,alternative sourcecompared to sunlight. 
257 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin D 
Infants 
DataarenotsufficienttoestablishanEstimatedAverage Re quirement (EAR) forinfants 
lessthan1 yearofage,and thereforeanAIhasbeen developedforvitaminD recomme ndation 
for thisagegroup.The AIforthe 0 to6 mo nthsand 7 to12 months lifestagegroups issetat 
10(gofvitamin D perdayby IOM (2011).Thereareno datato suggestthatolderinfantswou ld 
benefitfrom higherintakes.Therearedifferences inthevolume ofmilkorformulaintakeduring 
this 12-mo nth period,with newborns taking inlessthan older infants.The AIof10 µg/day, 
therefore,represents an overallintake forthe firstyear oflife,and m ay varyacross the life 
stages;italsoassumes early introductionofasupplementforbreast-fed babies.Inthe caseof 
exclusiveformu lafeeding,thereis an assumptionofagradualincrease inintake from 800to 
1,000m L/dayduringinfancy,w hich form oststandard formulas provides about10µg /day.
H um an milk from vitamin D deficientmother has been shown to containlow amounts 
of vitaminD (Jan M oham ed etal., 2014).Thus,for the above reasons and assuming that 
infantsarenotgetting anyvitamin D from sunlight,IOM (2011)recommende d anintakeofat 
least10µg/dayforinfants 0-6mo nths.Similarly,forinfants7-12 months,ithas been observed 
thatinthe absence ofanysunlightexposure,an intake of10(g/day willresultinmost ofthe 
infantswith serum 25(OH)D above 50nmol/L. 
RNI forinfants 
0 -6 m onths 10 µg/day
7 -12 m onths 10 µg/day 
Children and adolescents 
Fo rchildren and adolescents,ensuring normal,healthybone accretionis themain criteria 
to the DRIvalues.The requirement distribution developed using serum vitamin D concentrations 
and the intakesestimatedto achievesuch concentrationsare thebasisforthereference values 
by IOM (2011). 
For very young children inthislifestage group,currentlyno dataareavailableto link 
vitam inD nutriture directly to measures related to bone health outcomes. The Agency for 
H ealthcare R esearchand Qu alitybased inUniversity ofOttawa (AHRQ- Ottawa)condu cted a 
system aticevidence-basedreview toexamine the relationshipbetween vitaminD andricketsin 
children0to5years ofage.AHRQ- Ottawafound no studiesthatevaluated bone mineralcontent 
(BM C)and bone mineraldensity(BMD ),or fracturesincomparison w ithme asures ofvitamin 
D intake(Cranney etal., 2007).
Ho we ver,AHR Q-Ottawa found thattherew as fairevidence thatcirculatingvitamin D 
levelsareassociatedwith apositive change inB MD and BMC instudiesinolderchildren and 
adolescents.Serum 25OHD concentrations of40to50nmol/Lw ould ideally coincide withbone 
health benefitssuch aspositive effectson BMC and BMD. A studyconducted by Viljakainenet 
al.(2006)reportedthatvitaminD intakesof200IU/day(5ug/day)and 400IU/day(10ug/day) 
inadolescentgirls were associated with positiveBMC me asures atserum vitaminD levelsof 
50nm ol/L and above. 
258 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Vitam inD 
The IOM (2011)refersto severalresearch evidences thatindicatean intake ofvitamin D 
of10µg/dayachieves serum concentrations of40nm ol/L,and this intakeisthereforesetas the 
EAR forpersons 1 to3 years,4 to8 years,9 to13 years,and 14 to18 years ofage.As this 
requirement distributionappears to be normallydistributed,the assump tionofanother 30 
percentto covernearlyallthepopulation (i.e.,97.5percent)isappropriateand consistentw ith 
aserum vitamin D levelofapproximately50nmol/LasthetargetforanRDA value.B asedon 
the same analysis relatingserum vitamin D levelstointake,and w ith the assumptionofm inimal 
sun exposure,anintake of15µg/day is setastheRNI.These reference values assum e m inima l 
sun exposure. 
RN I forchildren 
1 -3 years 15 µg/day 
4 -6 years 15 µg/day 
7 -9 years 15 µg /day 
RN I foradolescents 
Boys 10 -18 years 15 µg/day 
Girls10 -18 years 15 µg/day 
Adults 
Bone m aintenance isthefocusforadultstage.The requirementdistributionbased on 
serum vitaminD concentrationsand theintakesestimatedto achieve such concentrationsare 
thebasisforthe referencevalues. 
Datarelating bone healthoutcomes to vitamin D intakeare generallylimited foradults 
19 to50yearsofages.Although bone mass measuresare,ofcourse,studied inthispopulation, 
consideration ofthedose-response relationshipbetween vitamin D and bone health are not 
usuallyincludedinsuch studies.Infact,thereareno randomized trialsinthisagegroup,and 
wh atever dataavailable come from associationstudies.The results areinconsistent,inpart 
because theconfounding inherentin observationalstudies.
The IOM (2011)recomm endationisconsideredbasedon therelationshipbetween serum 
vitaminD levelsand calciumabsorption,in which serum vitaminD levelsofbetween 30and 
50nmo l/Lwe reconsistentwithm aximalcalcium absorption.Based on these considerations as 
wellasthe intakeversusserum response analysisdescribedabove,an RNI of15µg/dayare 
establishedforadults 19 to 65yearsofage.These RNI values assum e minimalsun exposure. 
259 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin D 
RNI foradults 
M en 19 -50 years 15 µg/day
Wom en 19 -50 years 15 µg/day 
RNI foradults 
M en 19 -50 years 15 µg/day
Wom en 19 -50 years 15 µg/day 
RNI foradults 
M en 51 -65 years 15 µg/day 
Wom en 51 -65 years 15 µg/day 
Elderly 
F orelderly group,the reduction infracturerisk isthem ostimportantindicatorofinterest, 
notonly because ofthe actualevent,but also because ofthe highmor talityand morbidity 
associated w ith fractures.Changes such asimpaired renalfunction,less efficientsynthesisof 
vitamin D inskin,lower endogenous productionofactive vitamin D,increased PTH as wellas 
age-relatedchangesinbody composition affectthedailyrequirement ofvitaminD.More over, 
a sizeable proportionofthis population can be categorised as frailcom pared w ithother age 
groups,and the concerns forbone health areincreased. 
F indings from alarge longitudinalstudy (n = 2,686)carried outby Trivedi,Doll,& Khaw, 
2003w as used by IOM (2011)asreference for developingRNI forelderly.F urthermore ,upon 
reviewingavailabledata,IOM (2011)feltthatevidence isstrongthattheelderlyareathighrisk 
for vitamin D deficiency,which causessecondaryhyperparathyroidism and osteomalaciaand 
exacerbates osteoporosis,resulting in increased riskofskeletalfractures.Based on theavailable 
literature and uncertaintydue totheelderlyphysiologicalchanges,ahighervalueof20µg/day 
w asfeltprudentforindividuals over70yearsofage withlimited sun exposureand stores.The 
TSC on Vitamins agreed toadjusttheelderly age startingat65yearsinsteadof70tostandardize 
withothernutrientspresentedin theupdatedR NIofMalaysia.Itissuggested thattheadditional 
5ug/dayforthelower agegroup is notexpected tohaveany safetyconcern.
RNI forelderly 
M en > 65 years 20 µg/day 
Wom en > 65 years 20 µg/day 
260 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Vitam inD 
Pregnancy and Lactation
The EAR for non-pregnantwomen and adolescentsisappropriatefor pregnantwome n 
and adolescentsbased on the AHRQ-Ot tawa’sfindingofinsufficientevidence on the association 
of serum vitamin D levelwith m aternalBMD duringpregnancy.Fu rtherm ore,there is no 
evidence thatthevitam inD requireme nts ofpregnantw omen differfrom those ofnon-pregnant 
wom en.Hence, theR NIvaluesfor pregnantwom en and non-pregnantwome n areapplicable, 
providinganRDA of15µg/dayforeachgroup. 
The E AR fornon-lactatingwomen and adolescentsisappropriate for lactating wome n 
and adolescents based on evidence from RCTs (Basileetal., 2006;Hollis& W agner,2004; 
Saadietal., 2007;W agneretal., 2006).F urthermo re,thereis no evidence thatlactatingw ome n 
requirehigher serum vitamin D levelsthannon-lactating w omen .Hen ce,the RNI values for 
lactatingwom en and non-lactating wom en areapplicable,providingan R DA of15µg/dayfor 
eachgroup. 
RN I for
Pregnancy 15 µg/day 
Lactation 15 µg/day
D iscussionson revised RNI forMalaysia 
There is aone-totwo-foldincreaseintheRNI 2017compa red toRNI 2005.Thisisdue 
tothereferencedocument thatis used inthisreviewwhich istheIOM 2011.Thismore recent 
IOM reportreflectscompr ehensive evidence-based reviews and latestliteraturesearchers which 
was prepared by experts in vitam inD. Based on the detailed analysis,the IOM 2011panel 
suggestedhigherrecommendation ascompared toitspreviousreport(IOM 1997) which was 
referred by theRNI 2005TechnicalSub Committee on vitamin.
Num erous studies conducted by various investigators in different partof Malaysia 
(Appendix14.1)have reported high prevalenceofVitaminD deficiency and insufficiency.These 
findingsalsolendsupportforincreasingRN Iforvitam inD in thiscountry.Itisnoteworthythat 
thishigherrecommendat ionisbased on theassumptionofminimalsunlightexposure.Thus, 
thisrecomm endationisapplicabletopeopleinMalaysiaaseven w ith abundance ofsunlight, 
highsunlightavoidancepractices is found to be veryprominent.F urtherm ore,thereare limited 
choicesoffood withhigh levelofvitamin D availabletoMalaysia.
14.8 Tolerableupper intakelevels 
Serum 25(OH)D isausefulindicatorofvitamin D status,bothundernormalconditions 
and inthe contextofhypervitaminosis D.The latterischaracterised by aconsiderableincrease 
in plasma 25(OH)D concentration to a levelof approximately 160 to 500 ng/ml.Be cause 
changes incirculating levels of1,25(OH) 2D aregenerallysm alland unreliable,theelevated 
levelsof 25(OH)D areconsideredthe indicatorof toxicity.Serum levelsof 25(OH)D have 
diagnosticvalue,particularlyin distinguishingthehypercalcemia due to hypervitaminosisD 
261 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin D 
from that due to other causes,such as hyperparathyroidism, thyrotoxicosis,humoral 
hypercalcemiaofmalignancyand lymphom a(Alshahrani& Aljohani,2013). 
To determine the TolerableUp perIntake(UL),theIOM (2011)commi tteeconsideredthe 
em ergingevidenceofaU-shapedrelationshipfor all-cause mortality,cardiovascular disease, 
vascularcalcification,pancreatic cancer,falls,frailtyand fractures,w hich indicatesincreased 
riskatlow and high levelsand lowestriskatmode ratelevelsofvitaminD.The U L forages 9 
years and older is100ug/day with lower valueforinfantsand young children.The UL w as 
derivedfrom the acutepossibletoxicityfrom vitaminD of250ug/dayw hichis alsosupported 
asN O AEL (no observed adverseeventconcentration).Itis adjusted foruncertaintybased on 
chronicdiseaseoutcomes and all-causemortalityas w ellas emer gingconcerns about risksat 
serum vitamin D levelsmore than50ng/m L (125nmol/L).Itisnoteworthythatacutetoxicity 
isnottheappropriatebasis foraU L thatisintended toreflectlong-term chronic intake and to 
be used for public health(Ross etal., 2011). 
The tolerableupper intake for vitam inD for various age groups asproposed by IOM 
(2011)isgivenin Table 14.2. 
Table14.2.TolerableUpper Intake(UL)levelsofvitaminD forvariousage groups 
Age groups ug/day ofvitam in D 
Infants (0-6months) 25 
Infants (6-12months) 37.5 
Children,1-13years 100 
Adolescence> 14-18years 100 
Adults> 18 100 
P regnantw omen 100 
Lactatingw omen 100 
Source: IOM (2011) 
14.9 Researchrecommendations
• Addition of vitamin D in the Malaysian Fo od Com position Database as thiswould 
encourage more localresearchon dietaryintake ofvitamin D.
• Comprehensive nationwidevitamin D statusstudy. 
• R igorouslargescaleRCT totesttheeffectsofvitaminD on nonskeletaloutcome s. 
• Investigating the possiblevariationsofbiologicaleffectofvitamin D on time andduration 
ofsun exposure,adiposity,ethnicity and geneticfactor 
• R esearchon cut-offwithskeletalsystem and chronicdisease outcome s. 
262 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Vitam inD 
14.10 References 
Al-SadatN, Majid HA, SimPY ,etal(2016).Vitamin D deficiency inMalaysianadolescentsaged 
13 years: findings from the Malaysian Healthand Adolescents LongitudinalResearch 
Team study (M yHeA R Ts).BMJ Open. e010689.doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010689 
AlshahraniF& AljohaniN (2013).VitaminD: deficiency,sufficiency and toxicity.N utrients 5(9): 
3605-3616. 
Basile LA,TaylorSN,Wagner CL,Horst RL & HollisBW (2006).The effectofhigh-dose vitamin 
D supplementation on serum vitaminD levelsand milkcalciumconcentrationinlactating 
women and theirinfants.BreastfeedingMed icine 1(1):27-35.
Bee KP ,N ipaR,B aoK,Sandjaja,Abd TalibR ,U ruwan Y,Truong N ,F itrahE, PaulD & P anam P 
(2016).25-hydroxy-vitam inD dem ography and risk ofvitamin D insufficiency inthe 
SoutheastAsiaN utritionSurveys(SEA N UTS).AsiaPac J ClinN utr 25(3): 538-548. 
Chapuy M ,Meunier P & Feldm an D (1997).VitaminD insufficiency inadultsand theelderly 
Vitamin D.Academ icPress,SanDiego.
ChinKY,Ima-NirwanaS,Ibrahim S,Mohamed IN& W anNgah W Z (2014).Vitamin D statusin 
Malaysianmen and itsassociated factors.N utrients 6(12): 5419-5433. 
ChinYK,AliaAnnessaAK,Low N Y & Ima-NirwanaS (2016).Effectsofage,sex,and ethicity 
on bone healthstatus ofthe elderlyinKualaLumpu r,Malaysia.Clin Interv Aging 11: 
767-773.
Cranney A,H orsley T,O’Donn ellS,WeilerH, PuilL,Oo iD& H anley D (2007).Effectiveness and 
safetyofvitaminD inrelationtobone health.EvidR ep TechnolAssess 158(1): 23-25.
Daw odu A& TsangR C (2012).MaternalvitaminD status:effecton milkvitamin D contentand 
vitamin D statusofbreastfeedinginfants.Adv N utr 3(3):353-361.
Dawson-Hug hes B,DallalGE, KrallEA, H arrisS,SokollLJ & FalconerG (199 1).Effectofvitamin 
D supplem entation on wintertime and overallbone loss inhealthy postm enopausal 
women. Annals ofIntMed 115(7):505-512.
Garabedian M, H olick M, DeLuca H, & Boyle I(1972).Controlof25-hydroxycholecalciferol 
metabolism by parathyroidglands.Proc NatlAcad Sc USA 69(7):1673-1676.
Green TJ,SkeaffCM, RockellJE,Venn BJ,LambertA,Todd J & AgustinaR (2008).VitaminD 
statusand its associationwithparathyroid horm one concentrationsinwome n ofchild- 
bearingageliving inJakartaand KualaLumpur.EurJ ClinNu tr 62(3):373-378.
Ham idJanJM & NorliyanaA (2016).The associationbetween occupationalsunlightexposure 
& monsoon seasonon serum vitamin D.ILSIAnnualMee ting,ST Petersburg,F lorida. 
263 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin D 
H amid JanJM ,R owan A,Fong B & Loy SL (2014).MaternalSerum and Bre astMilkVitamin 
D Levels:Findings from the UniversitiSains Malaysia P regnancy CohortStudy.PLoS 
O ne 9(7),e100705.doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0100705 
H olickMF (1996).V itamin D and bone health.The J Nutr 126(4S): 1159S.
H olick MF (1994). McC ollum Award Lecture,19 9 4: vitam inD—n ew horizons for the 21st 
century.Am J Clin Nutr 60(4):619-630.
H olickM F (2002).Too littlevitaminD inpreme nopausalwome n: why should we care? The Am 
J Clin Nu tr 76(1):3-4.
H olickMF, BinkleyNC, Bischoff-FerrariHA, Gordon CM, Hanley DA, He aney RP , W eaver CM 
(2011).Evaluation,treatment,and prevention of vitamin D deficiency: an En docrine 
Society clinicalpracticeguideline.J ClinEndocrinolMetab 96(7):1911-1930.
H ollis B W & Wagne r CL (2004).Assessm ent of dietary vitamin D requirements during 
pregnancy and lactation.Am J ClinNutr 79(5):717-726.
Institute ofMedicineComm itteetoR eviewDietaryReference Intakes forVitaminD & Calcium. 
(2011).The Na tionalAcademies Collection: R eports funded by NationalInstitutes of 
H ealth.In R oss AC,TaylorCL,Yaktine AL & DelValleHB( eds).DietaryRe ference Intakes 
for Calcium and V itaminD.Washington (DC): NationalAcademies P ress (US)National 
Academy ofSciences. 
IOM (1997).V itamin D.In:Dietaryreferences forCalcium,P hosphorus,Magne sium,V itamin 
D andFluoride.Fo od and Nu trition B oard,InstituteofM edicine.NationalAcadem y Press, 
WashingtonDC. 
Jones G ,StrugnellSA & DeLU CA H F (1998).Currentunderstanding ofthe m olecularactions 
ofvitaminD.PhysiolRev 78(4):1193-1231.
Jurutka P W, Whitfield G K,Hsieh JC,Thom pson PD, Hau sslerCA & Haussler MR (2001). 
M olecularnatureofthevitaminD receptorand itsroleinregulationofgene expression. 
R ev EndocrMetab Disord 2(2):203-216.
Khor GL, Chee WS ,ShariffZM, Po h BK, Arumugam M, Rahman JA & TheobaldHE (2011). 
H igh prevalenceofvitamin D insufficiency and its associationwithB MI-for-age among 
prim aryschoolchildrenin KualaLumpur ,Malaysia.BMC PublicH ealth 11(1): 1. 
LipsP (2006).Vitamin D physiology.Progress inbiophysics and molecularbiology,92(1):4- 
8.
M alaysiaM OH. (2005).R ecomm ended Nu trientIntakes for M alaysia.M alaysia:National 
CoordinatingCommi tteeon Food and N utrition,Ministry ofHe althMalaysia. 
264 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Vitam inD 
Misra M, Pacaud D,Petryk A,Collett-SolbergPF & Kappy M (2008).V itamin D deficiencyin 
children and its m anagement: review of current knowledge and recom m endations. 
Pediatrics 122(2):398-417.
Mo y F M, & Bu lgiba A (2011).High prevalenceofvitaminD insufficiency and itsassociation 
withobesity and metabolic syndrom e among Malay adultsinKualaLumpur,Malaysia. 
BMC Public Health 11(1):1.
MO H (1985).M alaysianFood Regulations1985.MinistryofHea lthMalaysia. 
Nur bazlinM ,Chee WS,R okiahP ,TanAT,Chew YY,NusaibahAR, & ChanSP (2013).Effectsof 
sun exposureon 25(OH)vitamin D concentrationinurbanand ruralwo men inM alaysia. 
Asia Pac J Clin Nutr 22(3):391-399.
Ro ss AC ,M anson JE, Abrams SA,AloiaJF,Brannon PM, Clinton SK,Jones G (2011).The 2011 
reporton dietaryreference intakes forcalcium and vitamin D from the Institute of 
Medicine: whatcliniciansneed toknow.J Clin EndocrinolMetab 96(1): 53-58.
Rovn er AJ,& O ’Brien KO (2008).H ypovitaminosisD amo ng healthychildren in the United 
States: areview ofthecurrentevidence.Arch PediatrAd olescMed 162(6): 513-519.
SaadiH F,Dawodu A,AfandiBO, ZayedR ,BenedictS,& NagelkerkeN (2007).Efficacyofdaily 
andmo nthly high-dose calciferolinvitamin D-deficientnulliparous andlactating w omen. 
Am J ClinNutr 85(6):1565-1571.
SilverJ,Naveh-ManyT,Mayer H ,Schmelzer H & PopovtzerM (1986).Re gulationby vitamin 
D m etabolites ofparathyroidhormone gene transcriptioninvivo intherat.J ClinInvest 
78(5): 1296.
SlatopolskyE, Weerts C,ThielanJ,Horst R ,H arterH & MartinKJ (1984).Marked suppression 
ofsecondaryhyperparathyroidism by intravenous adm inistration of1,25-dihydroxy- 
cholecalciferolin uremic patients.J ClinInvest 74(6):2136.
SuriahAR,Chee W S,Zaitun Y & Chan SP (2004).VitaminD statusamong postmenopausal 
Malaysianwomen. AsiaPac J ClinNutr 13(3):255-260. 
SuttonJ & LazarusL (1976).G rowth hormone inexercise:comparisonofphysiologicaland 
pharm acologicalstimuli. J Appl Physiol 41(4):523-527.
TrivediDP ,DollR,& Khaw KT (2003).EffectoffourmonthlyoralvitaminD3 (cholecalciferol) 
supplem entation on fracturesand mortalityinmen and wome n livinginthecommunity: 
randomised double blindcontrolledtrial.BMJ 326(7387):469.
USDA (2016).USDA Food CompositionDatabase.
265 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin D 
V iljakainenHT ,NatriAM, Kärkkäinen M, Huttunen MM ,P alssaA,Jakobsen J,Lamberg,Allardt 
C (2006).A Po sitive Dose-Response E ffectofV itam inD Suppleme ntationon SiteSpecific 
B one M ineralAugmentationin AdolescentGirls: A Double BlindedRandomized Placebo 
Controlled 1 YearIntervention.J Bone MinerRes 21(6): 836-844.
Wagn er CL,Hu lseyTC ,Fann ing D,Ebeling M ,& Ho llis BW (2006).H igh-dose vitaminD3 
supplementation in a cohortof breastfeeding mo thers and their infants: a 6-month 
follow-uppilotstudy.BreastfeedingMedicine 1(2):59-70.
Washburn RA, SmithKW ,JetteAM & JanneyCA (1993).The P hysicalActivityScaleforthe 
Elderly (PA SE): developmentand evaluation.J ClinEpidem iol 46(2):153-162. 
W H O /FAO (2004).VitaminD. In:Human Vitaminand MineralRe quireme nts.Re portofaJoint 
F AO /WH O Expert Consultation.FAO ,R ome . 
Yamam otoT,DavisCG ,B rown MS ,Schneider W J,Casey M L,Go ldstein JL,& R ussellDW 
(1984).The human LDL receptor:acysteine-richproteinw ith multipleAlusequences in 
its mR NA .Cell 39(1):27-38.
Zitterm ann A & G um mert JF (2010).Sun,vitam inD,and cardiovasculardisease.J.Pho tochem. 
Photobiol101(2):124-129. 
266 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Vitam inD 
A ppendix 14.1:Prevalence ofVitam in D status 
A uthor,year Study Population Study Location Participants,n 
25 H ydroxyvitam in D (nm ol/l) 
% Sufficient 
[cutoff] 
% Insufficient 
[cutoff] 
% Deficient
[cutoff] 
C ut-off 
reference used 
Suriah etal., H ealthy KualaLum pur M alay,101 26.7 71.3 2.0 (W ashburn,Sm ith, 
(2004) postm enopausal Chinese,173 87.8 12.2 - Jette,& Janney, 
w om en [50 – 100 nm ol/L] [25– 50 nm ol/L] [< 25nm ol/L] 19 9 3) 
(50 -65years) 
G reen etal., (2008) N onpregnant KualaLum pur M alay,133 - 74 - N otm entioned 
w om en Chinese,123 - 38 -
(18 -40 years) Indian,122 - 68 1.0 
[< 50.0 nm ol/l] [< 17.5nm ol/l] 
Khoretal., (2011) P rim ary school KualaLum pur Total,402 27.6 37.1 35.3 (R ovner& O ’B rien,
children B oys,180 33.9 37.8 28.3 2008) 
(7 -12 years) G irls,222 22.5 36.5 41.0 
[> 50.0 nm ol/l] [37.5– 50.0 [≤ 37.5nm ol/l] 
nm ol/l] 
M oy & B ulgiba, M alay em ployees KualaLum pur Total,380 32.1 67.9 - (Zitterm ann & 
(2011) (35years above) M ale,158 - 41.1 - G um m ert,2010) 
F em ale,222 - 86.9 -
[> 50.0 nm ol/l] [< 50.0 nm ol/l] 
N urbazlin etal., U rban and rural KualaLum pur. Total,400 69 .5 18.5 12.0 IO M (2011) 
(2013) adultw om en N egeriSem bilan U rban,107 18.7 37.4 43.9 
R ural,29 3 88.1 11.6 0.3 
[≥ 50.0 nm ol/l] [30– 50.0 nm ol/l] [< 30 nm ol/l] 
Jan M oham ed, M alay pregnant U SM H ospital& 2nd Trim ester 5.9 34.3 59 .8 (Daw odu & Tsang, 
R ow an,F ong,and w om en (19 -40 Kubang Kerian 3rd Trim ester 22.5 40.2 37.3 2012) 
Loy (2014) years) H ealth Clinic, [≥ 75nm ol/l] [50 -75nm ol/l] [< 50nm ol/l] 
Kelantan. 
267 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin D 
A uthor,year Study Population Study Location Participants,n 
25 H ydroxyvitam in D (nm ol/l) 
% Sufficient 
[cutoff] 
% Insufficient 
[cutoff] 
% Deficient
[cutoff] 
C ut-off 
reference used 
Chin,Im a-N irw ana, Chinese and Klang V alley Chinese,233 84.5 15.5 0 IO M (2011) 
Ibrahim ,M oham ed, M alay adultm en M alay,150 66.0 32.7 1.33 
and W an N gah (20 years and Total,383 77.3 85.0 1.9 2 
(2014) above) [≥ 50.0 nm ol/l] [30– 50.0 nm ol/l] [< 30 nm ol/l] 
H am id Jan & M alay w orkers Kelantan O utdoorw orkers, 100 0 0 IO M (2011) 
N orliyana(2016) 119 
Indoorw orkers, 45.8 35.6 18.6 
118 [≥ 50.0 nm ol/l] [30–50.0 nm ol/l] [< 30 nm ol/l] 
Al-Sadatetal. Adolescents Klang V alley and U rban,723 1.4 9 .8 86.3 (M isra,P acaud, 
(2016) (13 years) P erak R ural,638 14.3 18.2 67.2 P etryk,Collett- 
[> 50.0 nm ol/l] [37.5– 50.0 [≤ 37.5nm ol/l] Solberg,& Kappy, 
nm ol/l] 2008) 
B ee Koon etal. Children (0.5-12 M alaysia U rban 27.5 40.1 4.9 N otm entioned 
(2016) years) R ural 30.1 38.5 2.7 
[50 – 100 nm ol/L] [25– 50 nm ol/L] [< 25nm ol/L] 
268 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Vitam inD 
M alaysia (20 17) M alaysia (20 0 5) IOM (20 11) 
A ge group RNI (µg/day) A ge group RNI (µg/day) A ge group RNI (µg/day) 
A ppendix 14.2.C om parison ofrecom m ended intake forVitam in D: RNI M alaysia (20 17),RNI M alaysia (20 0 5),and IOM (20 11) 
Infants Infants Infants 
0 -6 m onths 10 0 -5m onths 5 0 -6 m onths 10 
7 -12 m onths 10 6 -12 m onths 5 7 -12 m onths 10 
C hildren C hildren C hildren 
1 -3 years 15 1 -3 years 5 1 -3 years 15 
4 -6 years 15 4 -6 years 5 4 -8 years 15 
7 -9 years 15 7 -9 years 5
Boys Boys Boys 
10 -18 years 15 10 -18 years 5 9 -13 years 15 
- 14 -18 years 15 
-
G irls G irls G irls 
10 -18 years 15 10 -18 years 5 9 -13 years 15 
- 14 -18 years 15 
- -
M en M en M en 
19 -50 years 15 19 -65years 5 19 -30 years 15 
51 -65years 15 51 -65years 10 31 -50 years 15 
> 65years 20 > 65years 15 51 -70 years 15 
> 70 years 20 
269 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin D 
M alaysia (20 17) M alaysia (20 0 5) IOM (20 11) 
A ge group RNI (µg/day) A ge group RNI (µg/day) A ge group RNI (µg/day) 
W om en W om en W om en 
19 -50 years 15 19 -65years 5 19 -30 years 15 
51 -65years 15 51 -65years 10 31 -50 years 15 
> 65years 20 > 65years 15 51 -70 years 15 
> 70 years 20 
Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy 
15 5 14 -18 years 15 
19 -50 years 15 
Lactation Lactation Lactation 
15 5 14 -18 years 15 
19 -50 years 15 
N otes:1 m g = 40 IU 
270 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
15 • Vitamin E 
15.1 Introduction
Vitamin E was firstdiscoveredin 1922 butitwas notuntil40yearslaterthatthevitamin 
was establishedasessentialto human nutrition(Watson& P reedy,2008).V itamin E consists 
oftwo classes ofmo lecules know n as tocopherolsandtocotrienols,w hich are characterised by 
a6-chrom anolring and an isoprenoidsidechain.Tocopherolsand tocotrienolsaredifferentiated 
by theirphenyl “tails” as these are saturatedin the tocopherols but unsaturated in the 
tocotrienols.The members ofeach family aredesignatedalpha-( α),beta-( β),gam ma -( γ),or 
delta-( δ)according to the number and positionof methyl groups on the chroman olnuclei. 
Therefore,eightstereoisomersofthelargevitam inE fam ilydifferinginbiologicalactivitiesare 
possiblebut onlythe RRR -formoccursnaturally (Combs, 2012).
15.2 Functions
The m ainfunction of α-tocopherolisas a lipid-soluble biologicalantioxidant that 
prevents propagationoffree-radicalreactions.The vitaminisaperoxylradicalscavenger and 
especiallyprotectspolyunsaturated fattyacids(PUFAs )w ithinthe me m brane phospholipids 
and inplasmalipoproteinsaswellasreduces theoxidationoflow-densitylipoproteins(LDLs) 
(Combs, 2012).Itappearsthatwhen peroxylradicals areforme d,they react1000timesfaster 
with α-tocopherolthanwithPUFAs, thusprotectingthelatterwithinmembr ane phospholipids 
(Buet tner,1993).B y protecting P U FAs ,α-tocopherolhelps m aintain the integrityof cell 
mem branes,playsan importantrole in the stability of erythrocytes as well as prevents 
haemolyticanaemia(Muller,1986).
Like tocopherols,tocotrienols also exhibitantioxidant activitiesand serve as lipid 
protectors (Packeret.al, 2001).Infact,severalstudiesindicatedthatthese unsaturatedforms 
of vitamin E may offer superiorantioxidant activitythan α-tocopherol. For exam ples, 
tocotrienolsw ere found tobe more effective thantocopherolsin suppressinglipid peroxidation 
and protectingagainstfree-radicaldam agein bone (Maniamet.al,2008;Ahmad et.al,2005). 
Inaddition,tocotrienols possess otherhealthbenefitsthatare indeed beyond theantioxidant 
properties including theirbeneficialeffectsincancer,cardiovascularhealth,immune mo dulation 
and neuroprotection (M eganathan& Fu , 2016).For exam ple,tocotrienols exhibitanti- 
proliferative,pro-apoptosisand anti-angiogenicactivities,allofwh ichareimportantroles ofthis 
vitamin ininhibiting thesurvivalofvarious tumorcells(Ahsanet.al, 2014).In anotherexamp le, 
suppleme ntationoftocotrienols-rich fractionamong hypercholesterolemic patientsranging 
from 200to 300m g per daywas shown toresultinasignificantreductionintotalcholesterol 
and low densitylipoprotein(Meganathan& Fu, 2016). 
15.3 Metabolism 
While the preciserate of vitamin E absorption is unknown ,itis believedthatits 
absorptionefficiency isrelativelylow inhuma ns (IOM,2000).The abilityofan individualto 
absorbvitaminE ishighlydependent on theabilitytosimultaneouslydigestandabsorb dietary 
fat.Thatis,individualswith impaired fatabsorptiontypicallyexhibitlow vitaminE utilization 
(Ball,2004).Inintestinalmuc osalcells,vitamin E isincorporated intochylomicrons,which, 
271 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin E 
along the lymphaticpathway,aresecreted into the systemiccirculation.By the action of 
lipoprotein lipase (LPL),partofthevitamin E transported inchylomicronsis taken up by extra- 
hepatictissues,w hile theremnantchylomicrons transporttheremainingvitaminE to theliver 
(H errera& Barbas,2001).Inthe liver,vitam in E isfurther packaged into very low-density 
lipoprotein (VLDL) foritsdistribution toperipheraltissues. 
V itamin E contents in human tissuesvary considerably and tend to be related 
exponentiallytovitaminE intake.Itwas suggestedthatthehighestvitamin E levels,mostlyas 
(-tocopherolarefoundinadiposetissue and intheadrenals,and thelowestintheerythrocytes 
(Com bs,2012).Not allingestedvitaminE isstored inbody tissues astheexcess is secreted 
into thebile,w hichsubsequently eliminatedviathefaeces.Howev er,asmallfractionofexcess 
vitam inE may alsobe excretedthroughthe urine and skin sebaceous glands (IO M, 2000; 
W H O /FAO ,2004). 
15.4 Sources
Alleightisoforms ofvitaminE occurnaturallyinfoodsbutindifferingamounts,and are 
synthesisedonly by plants.The main dietarysources oftocopherolsincludevegetableoils,fat 
spreads from vegetableoils,seeds andnuts,and wh olegrains.However ,the proportions offour 
tocopherolsvary accordingly tothefood source,themor e abundantbeingα-tocopheroland
γ-tocopherol(Dror& Allen,2011;EFSA ,2015).O n the other hand,tocotrienolscan be found 
abundantlyinpalm oilwhilecerealssuch asoatbranalsocontain sm allamo untsoftocotrienols 
(Com bs,2012).Listoffood sources thatcontaintocopherolsand tocotrienolsare show n in 
Table15.1& Table15.2. 
Inaddition,sources ofvitaminE also includefoodsthatareadded withnatural,synthetic 
and esterified forms of tocopherols including d- α-tocopherol, dl- α-tocopherol,
d- α-tocopherylacetate,dl- α-tocopherylacetate and d- α-tocopherylacid succinate(EFSA, 
2015). 
272 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
VitaminE 
Table 15.1 Tocopherols contentoffoods 
Table 15.2 Tocotrienolscontentoffoods 
Food m g/100g 
Oils
Soybean 94.6 
Canola 45.8 
Sunflower 41.1 
Safflower 34.1 
Grapeseed 28.8 
Palm Olein* 21.8 
Red Palm Olein* 17.1 
Olive 15.3 
Corn 14.3 
Seeds and nuts 
Sunflower 27.5 
Pecans 26.7 
Almo nds 26.6 
Hazelnuts 15.4 
Peanuts 12.2 
Peanut butter 9.1 
Cer ealsand cerealproducts 
Rice bran,crude 4.9 
Whea tbran,crude 1.5 
Oatbran,raw 1.2 
Whea tflour 0.5 
Source: USDA Food Composition Database(2016)& *Dauqanetal. 2011 
Food m g/100g 
Oils
Palm Olein* 79.5 
Red Palm Olein* 78.7 
Soybean 0.1 
Canola 0.04 
Cer ealsand cerealproducts 
Oatbran,raw 2.3 
Whea tflour 0.1 
Source:USDA Food Com positionDatabase(2016)& *Dauqanet.al. 2011 
273 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin E 
15.5 Deficiency
Vitamin E deficiency occursonly rarelyinhumans,even among peoplelivingon relatively 
poor diets(Litwack,2011).Because thereare relativelylarge huma n tissue reserves ofvitamin 
E, very low intakes ofthis vitaminmust be ma intained forma ny months beforethere isany 
signiﬁcantfallincirculating vitamin E (Be nder,2003).Incontrast,deficiency ofvitaminE is 
mo re evidentinpatients with fatm alabsorption syndrome s,geneticabnormalities inproduction 
ofthe α-tocopheroltransfer protein( α-TTP) ,and protein-energy ma lnutrition(IOM,2000; 
Litwack,2011).For example,conditions involvingtheloss ofpancreaticexocrinefunction(i.e. 
pancreatitis),deficiency ofbile(i.e.biliary atresia)and defectsinlipoproteinme tabolism(i.e. 
abetalipoproteinemia)can leadto the simultaneous m alabsorption of lipids and vitaminE 
(Combs, 2012).Individualsw ith disorders causing vitamin E deficiency ma y exhibitclinical 
symp toms such asperipheralneuropathycharacterised by the degeneration ofthe large-caliber 
axons inthesensoryneurons.O thersymptom s observedinclude spinocerebellarataxia,skeletal 
m yopathy,andpigmentedretinopathy,increased erythrocytefragility,andincreased ethaneand 
pentane production.Ho w ever,overtdeficiencysymp tom s inindividualswithoutany disease 
and w ho consum e dietslow in vitaminE have neverbeen described (IOM,2000). 
The m ostw idely used biomarkerforestimating vitaminE statusisplasma or serum α-
tocopherolconcentration,partlydue to practicalityof itsuse inlarge surveys and the field 
setting.To date,there is a lack ofdatato seta precise cut-offvalueabove w hich vitaminE 
status may be considered asadequate.Ho we ver,plasma orserum α-tocopherolconcentrations 
< 12 µm ol/L(0.5mg /dL)innormaland healthy adultsmay be indicative ofvitam inE deficiency, 
w here the clinicalsymptom s havebeen reported(IOM,2000;E FSA,2015).Despite thiscut-off, 
studieson vitamin statusindiversepopulations haveused valuesranging from 2.8to24 µmol/L 
(0.1to1.0mg/dL)todefine deficiency and insufficiency.Thishas ledtohuge discrepancies in 
the reported prevalence of deficiency amo ng different countries (Dror & Allen,2011). 
Additionally,vitaminE deficiency canalso be assessed by me asuringthedegreeofhaemolysis 
induced by hydrogen peroxidein vitroand 24-hour urinaryexcretion ofalpha-carboxyethyl 
hydroxychroman ( α-CEH C),respectively(Pope etal, 2002;B ender,2008).
Studies on vitamin E deficiency am ong Malaysianpopulationare rather scarce.Inone 
onlyexample,Shaharetal. (1999) showed thatapproximately27% of350ruralelderlyMalays 
residing on the eastcoastofMalaysiahadplasmaα-tocopherol≤ 12 µm ol/L,with men athigher 
riskfordeficiencythanwomen. 
15.6 Factorsaffectingvitamin E requirements
B ioavailabilityofvitaminE isanimportantfactoraffecting requireme nts.As m ostdietary 
vitamin E isfound infood thatalsocontainsfat,itsbioavailabilityisinfluenced by theamount 
offatpresentinthefoods.Vitamin E absorptionrequires micelleformationand chylomicron 
secretionby the intestine,althoughtheoptimalamount offattoenhance vitaminE absorption 
hasnotbeen reported.
The dietaryintake ofPUF As also directly related to theneed forvitaminE, whe re the 
latterrequirements havebeen reported toincrease whe n intakes ofpolyunsaturatedfattyacids 
(PU F As)areincreased.As m entionedearlier,vitaminE functionsprimarily asanantioxidantin 
274 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
VitaminE 
biologicalsystems by trappingperoxylfreeradicals (Combs, 1992; IOM,2000).Inthisregard, 
vitaminE isfound incellularm embranes associatedwith PUFA inphospholipids.InvitaminE 
deficiency,the oxidation ofPU FA ismore readilypropagated alongtheme mbr ane,leadingto 
celldam ageand eventually symptoms, mainlyneurological.Ithas been suggested thataratio 
ofatleast0.4mg (1 µmo l)α-tocopherolper gram ofPUF A should be consumed by adults. 
How ever,themethod ofdeterminingthevitaminE requirementgeneratedby P UFA intakes is 
notuniversally accepted.There are also datato suggestthatlow-densitylipoprotein (LD L) 
oxidation susceptibilityinvitroisdependentupon itsPUFA content.Although itis clearthatthe 
relationshipbetween dietaryPU FA andvitaminE needs isnotsim ple,high PU FA intakesshould 
certainlybe accompaniedby increasedvitaminE intakes.
Inaddition,the body need forvitamin E is also affectedby otherdietaryfactorsincluding 
seleniumand vitaminC.Selenium sparestheneed forvitaminE and therefore,adequateintake 
ofvitaminE becomes even more importantin individualstakinglow selenium diets(Combs, 
2012).The roleofvitaminC istoreduce theoxidisedform ofvitaminE as aresultofthelatter 
free-radicalscavengingactivity.Thisinteraction hasledtothe conceptof‘vitamin E recycling’ 
where vitaminC helpsrestoretheantioxidantcapacityofvitamin E (Combs, 2012).
Itis recognised thatthe requireme nts for vitam inE differ between sexes w ith men at 
higher need thanw om en.The requirements also increasewithincreasing body weightuntil 
adulthood.B esides,increased exerciseand physicalactivitythatincrease normal oxidative 
metabolismalsoincreasetheneed for vitamin E.
Biologicalactivity and unitsofexpression
Biopotencies oftocopherols and tocotrienols are traditionallydeterm ined by different 
assays,nam elyfoetalresorption (rat),haem olysis(rat),myo pathy prevention (chick) and 
m yopathycure (rat).Based on these assays,the differentstereoisom ers ofvitam inE have 
widely varying biologicalactivities wh ich can be expressed as m illigram α-tocopherol 
equivalents( α-TE)ofthemost bio-potentnaturalvitamer,d- α-tocopherol(also calledRRR- α-
tocopherol).B esidesd- α-tocopherol,other forms ofvitaminE are alsofound inamixed diet 
and theirbiopotencies,althoughweakerby comparison,should alsobe takeninto consideration 
inthe calculationoftotalvitaminE activity.Thus,totalvitaminE activity(IOM 2000;W HO/FAO, 
2004)canbe calculated asfollows: 
α-TE = (m g d- α-tocopherolx 1.0)+(mg β-tocopherolx 0.5)+(mg γ-tocopherolx 0.1) 
+(m g δ-tocopherolx 0.03)+(mg α-tocotrienolx 0.3)+(mg β-tocotrienolx 0.05) 
According to IOM (2000)and WHO /FAO (2004),the biologicalactivitiesofγ-and δ-
tocotrienolarenotincluded in thecalculation ofα-TE astheywere considered tobe below the 
limitofdetection.Inaddition,thebiologicalactivityofvitaminE isalso expressed ininternational 
units(IU),inw hich1 mg ofd- α-tocopherolis equivalentto1.49IU. 
275 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin E 
15.7 Setting requirementsand recom mended intakesforvitaminE 
V itamin E isan existing vitamin in the MalaysianRNI (2005).In setting recomm endations 
for vitamin E intakeforMalaysianRN I2005,themain references used by theTechnicalSub- 
Commit tee(TSC)on Vitaminswere theWHO/FA O (2004)consultation recommenda tionsand 
the IO M (2000)publication.Therewere no localstudies ofvitamin E requirement orstatusthat 
couldbe used asreferences.The rationaleand approaches taken by these consultationswe re 
considered.The dietarypatternofthecomm unitywas alsotaken intoconsideration.
In the W HO /FAO (2004)consultation report,itwas discussed wh ether antioxidant 
propertyofvitaminE per se shouldbe and can be considered insettingarequirement.Itw as 
decided thattherewas insufficientevidence toenablerecomme nded nutrientintake tobe based 
on theadditionalhealthbenefitsobtainablefrom nutrientintakes above thoseusuallyfound in 
the diet.Even for vitam inE with itsimportant biologic antioxidantproperties,there was no 
consistentevidenceforprotection againstchronicdisease from dietarysupplements.
In addition,theWHO /FAO (2004)consultationsuggested thatdataavailablethenw ere 
notsufficientto formulaterecom mendations forvitamin E intake fordifferentage groupsexcept 
forinfancy.The Consultationhadthereforeused theterm “accepted intakes” which represents 
the bestestimatesofrequirements,based on thecurrentlyacceptableintakes thatsupportthe 
know n functionofthisvitamin.The TSC w asingeneralagreeme ntw iththeapproaches ofthe 
WHO /FAO reportand decided toadoptthe recom mend ed levelsforvitaminE forMalaysianRNI 
(2005).
Inthe presentreview ofthe vitamin E forRNI 2017,theTSC on Vitamins notedthatthere 
w asno update ofthe WH O/FAO (2004)consultationreport.The InstituteofMe dicinehas also 
notpublished a revised recomm endationafter theIOM (2000)report.Itw as how ever noted 
thatthe European Food Safety Authorityhas recentlypublished Dietary R eference values for 
vitamin E (E F SA,2015).As there are no localstudiesthatcould be utilised,the three main 
references used by theTechnicalSub-Commi ttee(TSC)on deriving therecommended levelsfor 
vitaminE forM alaysianR NI2017were thereportsfrom theW HO/F AO (2004),IOM (2000)and 
EFS A (2015).
In theEFS A (2015)report,thePanelnotedthatdataon therelationshipbetween vitamin 
E (unspecified form)orα-tocopherolintake and healthconsequences are inconsistentorlimited 
andcannotbe used to derive the requirement forα-tocopherol.The E FSA Panelalsoconsidered 
thatthereis,atpresent,insufficientdataon biomarkersofvitamin E intake/status/function(i.e. 
plasma/serum α-tocopherolconcentration,hydrogen peroxide-induced haem olysis,urinary 
α-CEH C excretionandm arkersofoxidative dam age)to derivethe requirementforα-tocopherol. 
B esides,dataon α-tocopherolkinetics and body poolsare limitedand thereforecannotbe used 
toderive α-tocopherolrequirem ent.WhilethePanelacknowledged thatα-tocopherolprevents 
P UFA oxidationand thatP UFA intake should be associated with an adequate α-tocopherol 
intake,littleevidencetosupportthisinteractiontobe used forderivingtherequireme ntforα-
tocopherol.The EFS A Panel,thereforedeliberated thatavailabledataon biomarkers ofvitamin 
E intake/status/function,on therelationshipbetween PUF A intake and α-tocopherolintake as 
w ellas on α-tocopherolkineticsand bod y pools can be used neither on theirown nor in 
com bination toderivethe requirementfor α-tocopherolinadults.
276 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
VitaminE 
As explained above,the W HO/FA O (2004)consultationhad used the term “accepted 
intakes”to representthebestestimatesofrequirementsforvitamin E. Similarly,theE FSA P anel 
also deliberated thatAverageRe quirem ents(ARs)cannotbe setforvitaminE (as α-tocopherol) 
and therefore chose to setAdequ ate Intakes (AIs)forallpopulation groups,based on observed 
intakesinhealthypopulations in ninecountriesoftheEurope an Union (EU) withno apparent 
vitamin E deficiency.Such intakesw ere estimatedusingtheEF SA Compre hensive E uropean 
Food Consumpt ionDatabaseand theEFSA Food CompositionDatabase. 
Insum mary,whilethe TSC on Vitam insacknowledges the latestrecommen dationof 
nutrientintake (as AdequateIntake)from thereportby EFSA (2015),the valuesadopted areonly 
based on observed averageintakesofα-tocopheroland α-tocopherol-equivalentsinhealthy 
populations inthe Euro peancountrieswithno apparentvitamin E deficiency.However ,asthere 
areno dataavailabletodateespeciallyon vitaminE intakeam ong Malaysian populations,the 
TSC on VitaminsfeltthatthereisinappropriatetoadopttheAd equateIntakesetby EF SA (2015). 
As such,theTSC on V itaminsdecided to continueto adopttheW HO /FAO (2004)vitaminE 
intake recomme ndations forMalaysianRNI 2017.The TSC opined thatthese recomm endations 
arestillappropriate.The currentrecommendations,which are thesame as the previousRNI 
2005,are giveninbold in thefollowing paragraphsaccordingtoage groups and summarised 
inAppendix 15.1. 
Infants 
No functionalcriteriaofvitamin E statushavebeen dem onstrated which reflectresponse 
todietary intakeininfants.Thus IOM (2000)hadrecommende d intakes forvitaminE based on 
Adequate Intake,calculated based on vitaminE intakeofinfantsfed principallyw ith hum an 
milk.
A similarapproach was taken by WH O /FAO (2004).The concentrationofvitamin E in 
earlyhuman milkremains fairlyconstantat3.2mg TE/L ofmilkafter 12 days.Therefore,an 
infantconsuming 0.8L human milka day would have an intakeof2.7 mg TE ofvitaminE. 
Recom mended intakeforinfantsisthusrounded offto3 m g inthepreviousRNI forMalaysia 
2005.Inthe EF SA (2015)report,m ean α-tocopherolconcentration in m ature milk of 
unsupplemen ted mo thersandoffull-term infantsranged between 3.5and 5.7mg/L (m id-point 
of4.6mg/L).Considering an infantconsuming 0.8L/dayduring thefirstsixmonths oflactation 
inexclusivelybreastfeeding women, and a concentrationof α-tocopherolis4.6mg/L,the 
secretionofm ilkduringlactationis estimatedtobe 3.7mg/day.
As the estimated V itamin E intakesduring lactation arefairly similarbased on both 
WH O /FAO (2004)and EFSA (2015),the TSC proposed thatrecomm ended intakes forinfants
0 -5m onthsand 6-11months areretainedasrecommended inRNI (2005). 
RN I forinfants 
0 -5 m onths 3 m g/day 
6 -11 m onths 3 m g/day
277 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin E 
Children and adolescents 
As there w ere previously no data available to guide in the estimation of average 
requirements forchildrenandadolescents,IOM (2000)decided tosetthe recomme nded intakes 
for vitamin E for these groups onlybased on extrapolationfrom adultvalues based on lean 
body m assand need forgrowth.
R ecently,the α-tocopherolequivalent( α-TE ) intakesof healthy populations in E U 
countries w ere m ade availableby E FSA (2015)P anel.Inchildren aged 1 to < 3years,the average 
α-TE intakes rangedbetween 4.7and 7.3mg/day in boys and betwee n 4.4and 6.8mg/dayin 
girls.Inchildrenaged 3 to< 10years,the averageα-TE intakes ranged between 7.1and 12.4 
m g/dayinboys and between 6.5and 11.8mg/day ingirls.Therefore,theEF SA P anelsetAIs 
forα-tocopherolforboth sexes at6 mg/dayand 9 mg/day forchildren aged 1 to < 3years and 
3to< 10years,respectively.Meanwhile,inchildren aged 10to< 18 yearsinEU countries,the 
EFS A P anelnoted thattheaverageα-TE intakes ranged between 9.6and 15.9m g/dayinboys 
and between 8.8and 13.8mg/dayingirls.As such,EFS A (2015)settheAIsforα-tocopherol 
at13mg/dayfor boys and 11 m g/dayforgirlsaged 10to< 18 years.
U nlike E FSA (2015)report,there are no data availableto dateespeciallyon vitam in E 
intakeam ong Malaysian childrenand adolescentstoderive the requirement forvitaminE. As 
such,the TSC decidedthatvitaminE requireme ntsforMalaysians followcloselythatpresently 
recomm ended by WHO /FAO (2004)and RNI (2005)forthecorrespondingagegroups.
RNI forchildren 
1 -3 years 5 mg/day
4 -6 years 5 mg/day
7 -9 years 7 mg /day 
RNI foradolescents 
Boys 10 -18 years 10 mg/day
G irls10 -18 years 7.5mg/day 
Adults and elderly 
The values recom mended by IOM (2000)were based largely on studiesofinduced 
vitamin E deficiencyinhum ansandthe correlation with hydrogen peroxide-induced erythrocyte 
lysis andplasmaα-tocopherolconcentrations.The hydrogen peroxide-induced hemolysis was 
then acceptedasthebestmarkerand used by IOM (2000)toestimateintakes forα-tocopherol 
requireme nts.IOM (2000)also decided thattherew asno scientific basisforassuming different 
requirements formen and women, and althoughbody w eightsm aybe greaterinmen, w omen 
havelargerfatmasses asapercentofbody we ight,and thusmay have similarrequirements. 
The WH O/FA O consultation reporthowever had provided foralowerrecomme nded intake for 
w omen. 
278 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
VitaminE 
Itisinteresting to notethataprevious M alaysianreportby Ng (2003)had recomm ended 
10mg TE/dayforadults,anestimate using the“Horwi tt’sequation”(Horw itt,1974)which was 
based on dietary P UFA and some allowance forcellularsynthesisand retention of PUF A in 
adiposetissues.Inthe report,the palmoil-based dietscontained66gtotalfat(26% energy)and 
3.3%energyPUF A (12.7%oftotalfattyacids or 8.4gPUFA) providedma inlyby linoleicacid. 
Itwas decided thatRN I(2005)toadoptthis value astherecom me nded intakeforadultmen. 
ThisisalsotheRNI for vitaminE inthe WHO/ FAO Consultationreport(2004).
Meanw hile,the values recomm ended by E FSA (2015) were based on average α-
tocopheroland α-tocopherolequivalent( α-TE)inEU countries.Inthereport,theaverageα-
tocopherolintakesamong adults ( ≥18 years)rangedbetween 8.2and 16 mg/day inmen and 
between 7.8and 12.5m g/dayin women whileaverageα-tocopherolequivalent( α-TE) intakes 
rangedbetween 10.1and 16.0mg/dayin m en and between 8.9 and 13.5mg/day inwome n. 
Usingm id-points ofthe range ofm ean intakes forα-tocopheroland forα-TE s,theE F SA P anel, 
thereforedecided tosetanAIforα-tocopherolat13mg/dayformen and11mg/day forw ome n.
Howe ver,asthere is no currentdataavailableon vitamin E intakes among Malaysian 
population,the TSC feltthatitisnecessaryto retain the valuerecomm ended inRNI (2005)as 
therecomm ended intakeforadultmen and women.
RN I foradults 
Men 19 -65 years 10 mg/day
Women 19 -65 years 7.5mg/day
IOM (2000)w asoftheopinionthatthereisno evidencethattheaging process impairs 
vitamin E absorptionorutilization.On theotherhand,the limited clinicaltrialevidence does not 
justifyprovidingforhigherrecomm endationsforhighervitaminE intakes atthistime.Similarly, 
the W HO /FAO (2004)had alsoprovided forthe same R NIfor elderlysubjects.In the EF SA 
(2015)report,therewas no classificationfor elderlysuggestingthattherecommended intake 
is similarto those of adultgroups.Therefore,TSC feltthatthe same intake should be 
recom mended for theelderlyadultsasrecommended inRNI (2005). 
RN I forelderly 
Men > 65 years 10 mg/day 
Women > 65 years 7.5mg/day 
Pregnancy and lactation 
IOM (2000)feltthatthere isno evidence atthe presenttime thatthe requirement for 
wom en duringpregnancyshouldbe increasedabovethe levelrecomme nded forwome n inthe 
non-pregnantstate.For lactating women, anadditionalamou ntequaltothetotalquantityofα-
tocopherolsecreted inhum an m ilk(4 mg) was added to the recomm ended intake for non- 
pregnantwo men.
279 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin E 
W HO/F AO (2004) consultation report, however, did not provide for increased 
requirements forvitaminE in pregnancyand lactationas itwas feltthatthere is no evidence of 
vitam in E requirements differentfrom those of other adults and presum ably alsoas the 
increasedenergyintakewould com pensatefortheincreased needs forinfantgrowthand m ilk 
synthesis.The EFSA (2015)P anelalso considered thatthere isno evidence foran additional 
dietaryα-tocopherolrequirement duringpregnancy or during lactation.As such,the AIfor 
pregnantorlactatingw omen is setthesame asfornon-pregnantnon-lactating wo me n.The TSC 
on vitamins decided tofollow thesame approach and retainthecorrespondingvaluesas cited 
by R N I(2005). 
RNI for
Pregnancy 7.5m g/day 
Lactation 7.5m g/day 
D iscussions on revisedRNI for Malaysia 
The RNI for M alaysia (2005)basically follows the sam e corresponding values 
recom mended by WHO/ F AO (2004).Inthisrevised RNI for M alaysia(2017),the proposed 
recommen ded intakes also retainsimilarcorrespondingvalues tothoseofRN I(2005).Appendix 
15.1 provides a sum ma ry ofthe revised RNI (2017),com paredwith the R NI(2005),EFSA 
(2015),the WHO /FAO (2004)recommendations and thevalues recommende d by IOM (2000).
R ecom mended intakesby IOM (2000)areon the average,significantlyhigherthanthe 
corresponding values cited by W HO/ F AO (2004).Thiswas particularlyevident inthe adults 
w here WHO/ FA O (2004)recomm ended aRNI of10mg TE/dayforadultma les,compa red with 
15mg TE by IOM (2000).As mentioned earlier,thema infactorused toassess theadequacy 
ofvitamin E intakesintheU nitedStatesand U nited Kingdom advisorybodiesw as thedietary 
intakeofP UFA s (WHO /FAO,2004).PUFA intakes intheUnited Statesareestimatedatslightly 
above 6% energywhichism uch higherthanthe3.3%energyreported forpalm oil-baseddiets 
(Ng ,1995).As such,itis notsurprising thatthe IOM (2000)has recomm ended aRNI of15m g 
TE/dayforadults. 
O n theotherhand,recom mended adequateintakes by EF SA (2015)are slightlyhigher 
thanthose citedby WHO /FAO (2004),butrelativelylowerthan those recommende d intakes by 
IO M (2000).The recommended intakes by E FS A (2015) were derived based on observed 
averageintakesofα-tocopheroland α-tocopherol-equivalents inhealthypopulationsintheEU 
countries withno apparentvitam inE deficiency.Inaddition,recommende d intakes citedby 
otherEuropean authoritiessuch asDeutschland-Austria-ConfoederatioHelvetica(2015),and 
The F rench Food SafetyAgency (2001)are either equivalent or slightly higher than those of 
W H O /FAO (2004)forallagegroups.
In the case ofMalaysia,thereareno dataavailabletodateon vitamin E intake am ong 
M alaysianpopulations thatcanbe used to justifythe need to follow EFS A (2015)recommen ded 
adequate intake.As such,TSC on vitaminsdecidedtoretainRNI (2017)similartothoseofRNI 
(2005).
280 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
VitaminE 
15.8 Tolerable upper intakelevels
Un like mo stothervitamins,vitamin E canbe viewed asone ofthe leasttoxic asitexhibits 
no depositionor saturationthresholds (Combs, 2012).Infact,huma ns appearto be ableto 
tolerate rather high levels.There isno evidenceofadverseeffectsfrom theconsumption of 
vitaminE naturallyoccurring infoods.Therefore,hazardidentification by IOM (2000)was 
focused on evidenceconcerningintakeofα-tocopherolasa supplement,food fortificant,or 
pharm acologicalagent.RR R - α-tocopherylacetateand allrac- α-tocopherylacetate arethe 
form s ofsyntheticvitaminE used almo stexclusivelyin supplements,food fortification,and 
pharmacologicagents.Upon reviewingavailabledata,WHO/ F AO (2004)consultation reported 
thatvitamin E appearstohaveverylow toxicity,and am ountsof100-200m g ofthesynthetic 
all-rac- α-tocopherolare consumed widelyassupplements.Ev idence ofpro-oxidant damage 
hasbeen associatedwiththefeeding ofsupplementsbutusuallyonlyatveryhighdoses (e.g., 
>1000mg/day).
On the otherhand,EFSA (2015)considered theimpacton blood clottingas thecritical 
adverse effectin the setting ofaTolerableUpp erIntakeLevel(UL),and identified aN o Observed 
Adverse EffectLevel(NO AEL) of540mg α-TE/daybased on astudyby Me ydaniet.al,1998. In 
thisstudy,healthy subjects aged ≥ 65yearswere reportedto develop no adverse effects, 
includingbleedingtime afterreceivingeitheraplacebo,40,134or 537mg α-TE/day(all-rac- 
α-tocopherol)forfourmonths.The EFSA setaUL for adults of270mg α-TE/day (rounded to 
300α-TE/day)usinganuncertaintyfactorof2.ThisU L alsoappliestopregnantand lactating 
wom en asthere w asno indication from animal studiesofaspecificriskforthese population 
groups.The ULs forchildrenwere derivedfrom theadultU L by allometricscalingon thebasis 
ofbody w eightto thepower of0.75,and rangedfrom 100mg α-TE/day (1-3years)to260mg 
α-TE/day(15-17years). 
Based on considerations ofcausality,relevance,and thequalityand completeness ofthe 
database,hemorrhagiceffectswere selectedby IOM (2000)asthecriticalendpointon which 
tobasethe Tolerable U pper IntakeLevel(UL)forvitaminE for adults.Thereissome evidence 
ofanincreasedincidenceofhemorrhagiceffectsinpremature infantsreceivingsupplemental 
α-tocopherol.The Alpha-Tocopherol,B etaCarotene (ATBC) CancerP reventionStudyinFinnish 
sm okers consuming 50mg of allrac- α-tocopherolfor6 years,reported a significant50% 
increaseinm ortality from hemorrhagicstroke(ATBC 1994).Howe ver,thehuman datafailto 
demonstrate consistently acausalassociationbetween excess α-tocopherolintake innormal, 
apparentlyhealthy individualsandanyadversehealthoutcome. Inthisrevised RNI forM alaysia 
(2017),theTSC decidedtofollow similarcorrespondingUL levelsfor thevitamin forvarious 
agegroups to thoseofIOM (2000)astabulatedinTable15.3.
281 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin E 
Table15.3 TolerableUpper Intake(UL)levelsofvitamin E forvariousage groups 
Age groups mg/day ofany form ofsupplem entaryα-tocopherol 
Infants N otpossible toestablish;sourceofintake shouldbe formulaand food only 
C hildren 
1 -3 years 200 
4 -8 years 300 
9 -13years 600 
A dolescents 
14 -18 years 800 
A dults 
≥ 19 years 1,000 
Pregnancy 
14 -18 years 800 
≥ 19 years 1,000 
Lactating wom en 
14 -18 years 800 
≥ 19 years 1,000 
Source: IOM (2000) 
15.9 ResearchRecomm endations 
The followingpriorityareasofresearch arerecommend ed:
• Determ ination ofvitaminE contentincludingtocopherolsandtocotrienols in localfoods, 
focused primarilyon vitamin E richfoods,i.e.fatsand oils,and nuts. 
• Un dertaking studies on the suitability ofvarious biomarkers ofstatus as indicatorsofthe 
requirement.
• Studieson healthbenefitsoftocotrienols.
• Assessingvitamin E intakesby differentagegroups ofthelocalpopulation. 
282 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
VitaminE 
15.10 References 
Ahm ad NS, KhalidB A,Luke DA,ImaNirwana S (2005).Tocotrienoloffers better protection 
thantocopherolfrom freeradical-induced dam age of ratbone.C lin Exp Pharma col 
Physiol. 32:761-770. 
Ahsan H ,Ahad A,IqbalJ,and SiddiquiWA (2014).Pharmacologicalpotentialoftocotrienols: 
areview.N utrition & Metabolism. 11(52):1-22. 
ATB C (The Alpha-Tocopherol,B eta-Carotene CancerPreventionStudyGroup)(1994).The effect 
ofvitamin E and beta-carotene on the incidence oflung cancer and other cancers in 
male smokers.N. Engl.J.M ed. 330:1029-1035. 
BallG FM (2004).V itamins.TheirR olein theHum anBody. Blackwe llScience.P p 234. 
Ben derDA (2003).NutritionalBiochemistryoftheVitamins.2nd E dition.Camb ridge U niversity 
Pr ess.Pp 109.
Bender DA (2008).Introduction to Nutritionand M etabolism.4thEdition.CRC Pr ess.Pp 339. 
Buettner G R (199 3).The peckingorderoffreeradicalsand antioxidants: Lipidperoxidation, 
alpha-tocopherol,and ascorbate.Arch Biochem Biophys. 300:535-543. 
Combs G F,Jr(2012).The Vitamins. Fundamental Aspects inN utritionand Health. Academic 
Pr ess,Inc.USA;p 45. 
DauqanE, AbdullahSaniH, AbdullahA,Muham ad H, and M d.Top AG (2011).VitaminE and 
B etaCaroteneCom position inF ourDifferentVegetableOils.Ame ricanJournalofApplied 
Sciences.8(5):407-412. 
Deutschland-Austria ConfoederatioHel vetica 2015.D-A-CH (Deutsche G esellschaft für 
Er nährung,Österreichische Ge sellschaftfürEr nährung,Schw eizerische Ge sellschaftfür 
Er nährung),2015.Referenzwertefürdie Nährstoffzufuhr.2.Auflage,1.Ausgabe.DGE, 
Bonn, G ermany,232 pp. 
Dror DK & AllenLH (2011).VitaminE deficiencyindevelopingcountries.Fd Nu trBull 32(2): 
124-143.
European Fo od SafetyAuthority (2015).EFSA Journal.13(7):4149. 
F rench Food SafetyAgency (Afssa)2001.(Agence française de sécuritésanitaire des aliments), 
2001.Apports nutritionnels conseilléspour lapopulationfrançaise.EditionsTec&Doc , 
Paris,France,605pp. 
He rreraE & Barbas C (2001).Vitamin E: action,me tabolismand perspectives.JournalPhysiol. 
Biochem. 57(2):43-56. 
283 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin E 
H orwittMK (1974).Status ofhuman requireme nts forvitaminE. Am J ClinNu tr. 8: 451-461. 
IOM (2000).V itamin E. In:DietaryReferenceIntakes for Ascorbicacid,VitaminE,Selenium, 
and Carotenoids. F ood and Nutrition Board,Institute ofM edicine.NationalAcademy 
P ress,WashingtonDC.Chapter6:pp 186-283. 
Litwack G (2011).Vitamins and the Immu ne System: Vitamins and H ormone s.Volume 86. 
Academic P ress.Pp 179. 
M aniam S,Moh amed N, ShuidAN & Soelaiman IN (2008).P alm TocotrienolExerted Better 
AntioxidantActivities in Bon e thanα-Tocopherol.Basic & C linicalPharm acology & 
Toxicology. 103(1):55-60. 
M eganathan P and F u JY (2016).B iologicalP roperties ofTocotrienols: E vidence inHum an 
Studies.InternationalJournalofMolecularSciences. 17(11):1682. 
M eydaniSN, Mey daniM, Blumberg JB ,Leka LS,Ped rosa M ,Diamond R and SchaeferEJ 
(1998).Assessment ofthesafetyofsupplementationw ithdifferentamounts ofvitamin 
inhealthy olderadults.Am J ClinNutr 68:311-318. 
M ullerDP (1986).Vitamin-E-itsroleinneurologicalfunction.PostgraduateMedicalJournal. 62: 
107-112.
N g TKW (1995).Towards improved fatintakeand nutritionforMalaysians.Mal J N utr. 1: 21- 
30. 
N g TKW (2003).Towards MalaysianReference Intakes forVitaminE. IMR QuarterlyB ulletin, 
Institute forMedicalR esearch,ISSN:0127-0265,No. 53:5-11. 
P ackerL,Weber SU,and Rimbach G (2001).Molecular Aspects ofα-TocotrienolAntioxidant 
Action and CellSignaling.J Nutr. 131(2): 369S-373S 
Po pe SA,BurtinG E, ClaytonP T,Madge DJ & Muller DP (2002).Synthesis and analysisof 
conjugate of the majorvitamin E metabolite,alpha-CEHC. Free RadicalBiology and 
Me dicine. 33:807-817. 
ShaharS,EarlandJ,Powers HJ, Rahm anSA (1999).Nu tritionalstatusofruralelderlyMalays: 
dietaryand biochemicalfindings. Int.J.Vitam N utrRes. 69:277-84. 
U SDA N ationalNutrientDatabaseforStandard Re ference,Release 28 (2016).US Department 
ofAgriculture,AgriculturalRe search Service,NutrientDataLaboratory.V ersionCurrent: 
Septemb er2016.Internet:http://www.ars.usda.gov/ndb/. 
W atson R R & Pr eedy VR (2008).Tocotrienols.V itamin E beyond Tocopherols.CR C Pre ss.pp4. 
W HO/ FAO (2004).Human energy requirem ents. Repo rtof a Joint FAO /WHO /UNU Expert 
Consultation: Ro me, 17-24Oc tober2001.FAO food andnutrition technicalreportseries, 
103pp. 
284 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
VitaminE 
RNI M alaysia (20 17)*
A ge group RNI (m g/day) 
W H O/FA O (20 0 4) IOM (20 0 0 ) EFSA (20 15) 
A ppendix 15.1 C om parison ofrecom m ended intake forvitam in E:RNI M alaysia (20 17),A cceptable Intakes ofW H O/FA O (20 0 4),
A I and RDA ofIOM (20 0 0 )and A I ofEFSA (20 15) 
A ge group 
A cceptable 
intakes 
(m g/day) 
A ge group A I 
(m g/day) A ge group A I 
(m g/day) 
Infants Infants Infants Infants 
0 -5m onths 3 0 -6 m onths 2.7 0 -6 m onths 4
6 -11 m onths 3 7 -12 m onths 2.7 7 -12 m onths 5 7 -11 m onths 5
RDA (m g/d) 
C hildren C hildren C hildren C hildren 
1 -3 years 5 1 -3 years 5 1 -3 years 6 1 -< 3 years 6
4 -6 years 5 4 -6 years 5 4 -8 years 7 3 -< 10 years 9
7 -9 years 7 7 -9 years 7
Boys Boys Boys Boys 
10 -18 years 10 10 -18 years 10 9 -13 years 11 10 -< 18 years 13 
14 -18 years 15 
G irls G irls G irls G irls 
10 -18 years 7.5 10 -18 years 7.5 9 -13 years 11 10 -< 18 years 11 
14 -18 years 15 
M en M en M en M en 
19 -65years 10 19 -65years 10 19 -30 years 15 >18 years 13 
> 65years 10 > 65years 10 31 -50 years 15 
51 -70 years 15 
> 70 years 15 
285 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin E 
RNI M alaysia (20 17)*
A ge group RNI (m g/day) 
W H O/FA O (20 0 4) IOM (20 0 0 ) EFSA (20 15) 
A ge group 
A cceptable 
intakes 
(m g/day) 
A ge group A I 
(m g/day) A ge group A I 
(m g/day) 
W om en W om en W om en W om en 
19 -65years 7.5 19 -65years 7.5 19 -30 years 15 >18 years 11 
> 65years 7.5 > 65years 7.5 31 -50 years 15 
51 -70 years 15 
> 70 years 15 
Pregnancy 7.5 Pregnancy 7.5 Pregnancy Pregnancy 11 
< 18 years 15 
19 -30 years 15 
31 -50 years 15 
Lactation 7.5 Lactation 7.5 Lactation Lactation 11 
< 18 years 19 
19 – 30 years 19 
31 – 50 years 19 
*R ecom m endations sam e as R N I(2005) 
286 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
16 • V itamin K 
16.1 Introduction 
Vitamin K represents agroup offat-solublevitamins w ithacomm on chemicalstructure 
of 2-methyl-1,4-naphtoquinone but differin the side-chain structures.These natural 
compounds includevitaminK 1 orphylloquinone,which hasaphytylside-chain.P hylloquinone 
issynthesisedby green plantsand isthepredominantform inthediet.VitaminK 2 represents 
aseriesofvitaminK formsknown asmenaquinones.These have sidechainsbased on repeating 
unsaturated5-carbon (prenyl)units,and aredesignated asmena quinone-n(MK-n)according 
tothe num ber (n)ofprenylunits.Most ofthemenaquinones are synthesised by bacteriainthe 
largeintestine,and canalso be found in animalproductsand ferme nted foods.VitaminK 2 can 
be converted from vitamin K 1 by human intestinalmicrobiotaand animals(Shearer,1992). 
A synthetic com pound known asmenadione (vitamin K 3)is aprovitaminwithno carbon 
side-chainsbut can be alkylated by the liver to produce m enaquinone-4 (MK-4) from 
phylloquinone.Thisconversion process does notinvolvebacterialaction.The biologicalpotency 
ofmenadione isfound to be twiceofthenaturallyoccurringforms vitamin K 1 and K 2.
16.2 Functions
Vitamin K isessentialfora uniquepost-translationalchemicalmodificationina small 
group ofproteinswithcalcium-bindingproperties,collectivelyknown as vitaminK-dependent 
proteins (Gla-proteins).These proteins are involvedinbloodcoagulation and bone metabolism. 
Vitam inK (m ajorlyK 1)acts as a co-factor for the γ-glutam ylcarboxylase (GGCX ),an 
enzyme w hich catalyses the carboxylationofaminoacidglutamic acid (Glu)residues inproteins 
to γ-carboxyglutamyl (Gla)residues,w hichmakes itpossible forthem to bind calcium and 
form blood clots.Thus far,theonly unequivocalrole ofvitam inK inhealthis in themaintenance 
ofnormal blood coagulation (for which itwas originallydesignated,koagulation,theDanish 
word forblood clotting).F actorsII(prothrombin),VII,IX,andX (pro-coagulants),and proteins 
C,S and Z (anti-coagulants)are vitamin-Kdependent proteinsproduced by the liverthatis 
directlyinvolvedincoagulationcascade(aseriesofeventsthatstop bleeding through blood clot 
formation)(IOM, 2001;WHO/ FAO ,2004).
Vitamin K 2 (m enaquinone)is required fortheγ-carboxylationofbone proteins,mos t 
notablyosteocalcin.Research has indicated thathigh serum levels of undercarboxylated 
osteocalcin areassociatedwithlowe rbone mineraldensity(Gundberg,Lian,andB ooth,2012). 
An adequateintakeofvitamin K also assistsin reducingbone turnoverand protectingagainst 
fractures.Ep idemiologicalstudies indicate thatlow vitaminK intake orstatusisassociatedwith 
osteoporosis,osteopenia,and increasedriskoffracture(EFS A,2009).AlthoughvitaminK is 
involved inthem etabolism ofosteocalcin,theroleofvitamin K supplementation inreducingrisk 
for osteoporosis is still being investigated.A system atic review and m eta-analysis of 
randomised clinicalcontrolled trials examined the effectof vitamin K suppleme ntation 
(phytonadione and m enaquinone-4)on bone mineraldensityand bone fractures (Cockayne
etal, 2006).Itw asshown that12 outof13trialsincludeddemonstrated thatsupplementation 
witheitherphytonadione (10mg/day)orM K-4(15mg/dayor45m g/day)improved bone m ineral 
density.Inaddition,the incidence of hip,vertebral,and allnon-vertebralfractures was 
significantly reduced w ithsuppleme ntationofMK-4.These findings,however,shouldbe treated 
287 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin K 
w ithcautionbecause the studies included were not designed to show a fracture effect.In 
addition,allthe studieswithfracture outcome s w ere undertaken inJapan,and there m aybe 
dietarydifferenceswhich could indicatethatthese findings arenotapplicableelsewhere.Indeed, 
the Japanesepeopleconsume a lot ofa traditionalfood called natto.Itisa very rich dietary 
sourceofvitamin K,almost allofwhich occursinthe form ofM K-7.Supplem entation with M K- 
7 (in the form of nattoextract)has been shown to induce mo re com plete carboxylation of 
osteocalcin com paredwithphylloquinone(Schurgers etal., 2007).
A mo re recent me ta-analysis involvinga totalof 21 studies (11of which exclusively 
involved Japanesepatients)observedasignificantdecrease in theloss ofvertebralandforearm 
bone m ineraldensity,and reduced incidence offractures,withsupplementationof45mg/day 
ofM K-4 ( Huang etal., 2015).However, thebenefitsw ereonlyseen inpostmenopausalwomen 
w ithosteoporosis, with no significanteffect seen in postmen opausalwomen without 
osteoporosis.In anotherdevelopme nt,the Eu ropean F ood Safety Authority(EF SA)has approved 
ahealthclaimforvitaminK,acknowledgingthatitcontributestomaintenanceofnormalbone, 
asreflected by scientificevidence(EFSA, 2009). 
Apartfrom itshistoricalrolein blood clotting,and mo re recentparticipation inbone 
building,severalothervitamin K-dependentGla-proteins have alsobeen isolatedfrom kidney, 
lungs,and othertissues.M atrixGla-protein(MGP) isavitaminK-dependentproteinthatmay 
playa role intheprevention ofarterialcalcificationand stiffening,one oftherisk factors for 
coronary heartdisease.An adequateintakeofvitamin K 2 hasbeen shown tolowe rtherisk of 
vasculardamage,because itactivatesMGP ,w hich inhibitsthedepositofcalciumon thewalls 
(Buc hanan etal., 2016).A random ised-controlled trialfound thatm enaquinone supplem entation 
(M K-7,180 µg/day)significantlydecreased arterialstiffness after threeyears,but theeffect 
w asm orevisibleamong patientswithpoorervascularstatusatbaseline (Knapen etal., 2015). 
In vitro studieshavedemonstratedthatmena quinonehas anti-cancerproperties as itisableto 
inducecellcyclearrestand apoptosis in leukemia,liver,gastric,colorectal,lung,and prostate 
cancer cells.Intakeofm enaquinone (MK-4,45-90µg/day)hasbeen dem onstratedin a few 
studies,includingtwo meta-analyses,toreduce overallcancerincidence and mortality(Riazet 
al., 2012;Zhong etal., 2013). 
16.3 M etabolism 
P hylloquinones (vitamin K 1)areabsorbed by anenergy-dependent process inthesmall 
intestine.On the otherhand,m enaquinones (K 2)and m enadiones (K 3)areabsorbed viapassive 
diffusioninsmalland largeintestines.As a fat-solublevitam in,the absorption requiresa 
m inimalamoun tofdietaryfatand anorma lsupplyofbile saltsand pancreaticjuices.Inhealthy 
adults,the efficiency ofphylloquinone absorptioninits free form isabout80% (Sheareretal, 
2012).The absorbed vitamins are incorporated intochylomicronsin thelymph and taken tothe 
liver.Here theyare incorporated into VL DLs and subsequentlydelivered totheperipheraltissues 
by LDLs.Absorptionofvitamin K isreduced inconditions involving obstructions ofthebile 
ductsuch asinobstructivejaundiceand liverfailure.VitaminK isfound inlow concentrations 
in the cellularm embranes ofmany tissues.B ecauseofthemetabolism ofthevitamin,mixtures 
ofvitame rsK can be found intissues even w hen asingleform isconsumed .Most tissues would 
containphylloquinones and me naquinones.Hum an liverstoresnorm allycomp riseabout 90 
percentmenaq uinonesand 10percentphylloquinone(Sheareretal., 2012).
288 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Vitam inK 
Vitamin K israpidlyand extensively m etabolised inthe liver.Phylloquinones can be 
converted into m enaquinones beforeabsorptionand areexcreted viathebile thatpasses out 
ofthebody inthefaeces.Menadiones are primarilyexcretedinthe urine.Thisrapidm etabolism 
accountsforvitam in K’srelatively low levelsinblood and tissue stores compared tootherfat- 
solublevitamins. 
16.4 Sources 
Phylloquinone (vitamin K 1)ispresentinlarge amounts (atlevels reaching100µg/100 
g)infresh,green,leafyvegetables.Excellentsourcesincludespinach,mus tard,chives,spring 
onions,cabbage,lettuce,broccoli,w atercress,and sweet potatoleaves (Table16.1).Oftenthe 
absorption isimproved when accompanied by fatssuch as oils or butter.Phy lloquinone 
obtainedfrom green,leafy vegetablesistightlybound totheme mbranes ofplantchloroplasts, 
and thus is less bioavailablecomp ared with phylloquinone obtained from plantoilsand/or 
dietary supplements. 
Table 16.1:Vitamin K 1 (phylloquinone)contentoffoods 
Food µg per 100g 
Vegetables 
Mustardleaves(cooked) 593 
Spinach(cooked) 494 
Saladgreens (raw) 315 
Corianderleaves(raw) 310 
Sweetpotatoleaves(cooked) 302 
Watercress(raw) 250 
Chives(raw) 213 
Springonions(raw) 207 
Br occoli(cooked) 141 
Lettuce,green leaf(raw) 126 
Cabbage(cooked) 109 
Okra(cooked) 40 
Celery (cooked) 38 
Chinesecabbage,pak-choi(cooked) 34 
Fatsand Oils* 
Soybeanoil 193 
Canolaoil 127 
Oliveoil 55 
Margarine 42 
289 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin K 
For m enaquinones (vitaminK 2)subtypes: MK-4 isproduced in animaltissue and can be 
found indairy products,egg yolk,chicken,pork,and beef.M K-7 isfound inferme nted products 
e.g.cheeses,(Table 16.2)and veryhighlevelare found innatto,a Japanese traditionalfood 
consistingofferm ented soy beans (Kamao etal.,2007).The me naquinone indairy products 
and nattoissynthesisedby fermentingbacteriasuch as Bacillussubtilis; inmea ts,K 1 and K 3
are converted toK 2 by living tissue.Many species ofthebacteria(including Escherichiacoli )
w hicharepresentin the largeintestineof hum ans,synthesize a significantportion ofthis 
vitaminand thus furnish theneeds ofthebody.Me naquinones(M K-4and MK-7)areavailable 
for supplement ation,howe ver,the half-lifeand bioavailability ofMK -7 hasbeen found to be 
superiortothatofMK-4 (Buchanan etal., 2016).Me naquinones,which are primarilyderived 
from animal-basedsources,areconsum ed in food m atricescontaining m ore fatthatmay 
impr ove absorption andlead to greaterbioavailability thanphylloquinone (Beu lens etal., 2013). 
The lack ofevidence ofa significantvitamin K deficiency inthe generalpopulation indicates 
thatthe requiredamount of the vitamin can norm allybe adequatelyobtained by foods or 
produced by intestinalmicroflora.V itaminK isrelativelystabletoheatprocessing,but itcan 
be destroyed by exposuretolight. 
Food µg per 100g 
Prepared Foods* 
Saladdressings 100 
Coleslaw 80 
M ayonnaise 41 
Source: *Phylloquinoneconcentrationofcomm on foods,IOM (2001) 
U SDA NationalNutrientDatabasefor StandardR eference,R elease 28 (2015) 
290 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Vitam inK 
Food µg per 100g 
FermentedProducts 
Natto* 939 
Meat and Poultry 
Beef,pepperoni 41.7 
Chickendrumstick,with skin(cooked) 33.2 
Chicken,frankfurter 25.0 
Chickenbreast,w ithskin(cooked) 15.5 
Turkey,breast 9.1 
DairyProducts 
Cheese,cream 8.7 
Cheese,cheddar 8.6 
Cheese,parmesan 7.1 
Cheese,m ozzarella 4.1 
R eference:*Kam aoetal., (2007) 
U SDA NationalNutrientDatabaseforStandardR eference,Release 28 (2015) 
Table 16.2:Vitamin K 2 (menaquinone)contentoffoods 
16.5 Deficiency 
Variousindicatorshave been used to assessvitam in K status inhum ans including 
prothrombin time,plasma factorVII,plasma and serum phylloquinoneconcentration,urinary 
γ-carboxylglutamyl residues, undercarboxylated prothrom bin, and undercarboxylated 
osteocalcin.Of these,theonlyclinically significantindicatorisprothrombin time(thetimeit 
takesforblood to clot).VitaminK deficiency leads to prolongedblood coagulationtime and 
increasedincidenceofbleedingand haemorrhage.The deficiency isma rked by alow levelof 
plasm a prothrombin (hypoprothromb inemia)and can be corrected by administration of2-5 
mg/dayvitamin K orally.
A primarydeficiencyisnotcomm onlyfound inhealthychildren and adultsbecause of 
the good supplyofvitamin K from plants.Inaddition,intestinalfloracan synthesise asignificant 
portionofthe vitamin required daily.The most common causes ofvitaminK deficiency are 
therefore secondaryinnature and can occur intwo circums tances.First,thiscan be due to 
impaired fatabsorption forexamplein inflammatory bowel disease,coeliac disease,ulcerative 
colitis,andsevere liverdisease.Second,thesynthesisandactionofvitaminK can be disrupted 
by some drugs.For examp le,prolonged broad-spectrumantibiotics treatmentwould killvitam in 
K-producing bacteriain the intestine, and anticoagulantdrugs interfere with vitamin K 
metabolismand activity.
291 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin K 
U nlikehealthy adults,newly-born breastfed infants somet imes suffer prolonged 
prothrom bintime due to vitamin K deficiency.The syndrome, known asvitamin K deficiency 
bleeding(VKDB ),represents asignificantglobalhealthproblem (FA O/WHO, 2004).Itusually 
happens in the firstweek of life due to very little vitam in K istransferred from maternal 
circulation for storagein foetaltissues. In addition,newb orns have a relatively sterile 
gastrointestinaltract(free from gutbacteriawhich can synthesise vitamin K).They arealso 
generallyfed foods thatarerelativelyfreeofbacterialcontamination.In addition,hum an milk 
isnotagood source ofvitamin K.P reterm babies are mor e susceptibletovitamin K deficiency 
than theirterm counterparts.B ased on evidences (Pu ckett and O ffringa,2007),the WHO 
recom men ds thatall newborn infantsshould be given 1m g of vitamin K prophylaxis 
intramuscularlyafterthefirsthour ofbirth(W HO ,2013). 
16.6 Factorsaffectingvitamin K requirements
Factors to be considered wh en estimating the requirements for vitam inK include the 
bioavailabilityofphylloquinone from various foods,nutrient-nutrientinteractions,and drug- 
nutrientinteractions (IOM,2001).
V ery little is know n withregardsto bioavailabilityofvitaminK from differentfoods.The 
efficiency ofabsorption ofphylloquinone intheform ofcooked spinachw as reportedto be 4%, 
com pared with an estimated 80% when phylloquinoneisgiven initsfree form.On theother 
hand,threetimesasmuch phylloquinonewas absorbed w hen thespinach was consumed w ith 
butter (Garber etal., 1999). Even though thegreatestfood source ofphylloquinone isfrom 
leafy vegetables,itsbioavailaibility is poor. This ma y be due to the poor extractionof 
phylloquinone w hichislocatedin thechloroplast.Itistightlybound to thylakoidmem brane 
w here itplaysarole inphotosynthesis.
H igh doses ofvitaminE and retinoidshavebeen show n toantagonise vitamin K action 
inanimalstudies.However, them etabolic basisforthisantagonism hasnotbeen completely 
elucidated and adverseresponsesinhuman have notbeen reported (IOM,2001). 
V itamin K is converted to an inactiveform once it has activated the clotting factors 
(prothrom bin).Itmust then be reactivated foritsbiologicalactionto persist.Drugs such as 
w arfarin,w hichstrongly inhibitsthereactivationprocess,actsasapow erfulanticoagulantand 
is w idelyprescribed for the prevention of thromb oticdisorders.Patients takingthese 
anticoagulantdrugsdo notneed toeliminate vitaminK from theirdiets.They should,howe ver, 
m aintainaconsistentdietaryvitamin K intake and avoidvitaminK supplementation. 
292 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Vitam inK 
16.7 Settingrequireme nts and recomm ended intakesofvitamin K
Vitamin K isanewly added vitamininMalaysian RNI (2017).There areno localdataon 
vitaminK requirementsthatcouldbe used by theTechnicalSub Committee (TSC)on V itamins 
toarriveattheRNI forvitamin K.Thus,theTSC referredtotheWHO/FA O (2004)consultation 
reportas w ellas the IOM (2001)DRIrecommendations.The rationalesand stepstakenin 
setting therequirements andthelevelsrecomm ended by theseorganisations were considered. 
IOM (2001)setthe Adequate Intakethatisbased on them edian intake fordifferentagegroups 
as reported by the Third N ationalHe althand Nut rition Exam ination Survey (NHA NE S III). 
Ho we ver,adoptingasimilarapproachforsettingMalaysian RN I(2017)isnotpossible asthere 
isno inform ation on vitamin K intake among Malaysianpopulations.Me anwhile,W HO /FAO 
(2004)hassettherecom mended valuesforvitam inK thatisbased on adailyintake of1 µg/kg 
body we ight/day ofphylloquinone foritsclassicalfunctionin coagulation.Upon reviewing both 
reports,the TSC on V itamins agreed to adoptthe WHO/FAO (2004)values as the RNI for 
Malaysia2017,given inbold accordingtoagegroups in thefollowing paragraphs.The proposed 
RN Iissummarised in Appendix 16.1. 
The TSC on V itamins did not providea specificrecomme ndationforvitaminK 2 asno 
such recom mendation hasbeen made by WHO/FAO (2004)or IOM (2001).
Infants 
Settingthe requirementofvitamin K for infantsup toage6 months iscomplicated by 
theneed to preventararebutpotentiallydevastatingbleeding disorder(also know n asVKDB) 
due to vitam inK deficiency.InIOM (2001)report,itw as proposed thatthe recom m ended 
intakesforvitaminK arebased on AdequateIntake(AI),calculated based on mean vitamin K 
intake of infants principally fed with human milkwhileassum ing thatinfants also receive 
prophylacticvitamin K atbirth.Consideringtheaveragephylloquinoneconcentrationof2.5 
µg/Linhuman milkand theaverageintakeofmilkof0.78L/day,theAIforinfants0-6months 
was set at2.0µg/dayafter rounding. Meanwhile,the AIfor infants 7-12 m onths was 
extrapolatedat2.5µg/dayafterrounding.
How ever,the factthatVKDB isepidemiologicallyassociated withbreastfeeding,setting 
ofrequirements solely based on normalintakesofhum an milkisnotconsidered prudent.As 
such,the WH O/FAO expertconsultation(WH O/FAO,2004)hassetahigherrecommend ed intake 
forinfants aged 0 to 6 months (theperiod when VKDB riskisconsidered highest)at5µg/day, 
and at10µg/dayforolderinfants.Thisis basedon extrapolating the adultRDA of1 µg/kgbody 
we ight/day.Nevertheless,exclusively breastfedinfantsmay onlyme et40% ofthisrequireme nt 
ifitisassumed thatthevitamin K consumption through human milkis2 µg/day.To prevent 
bleeding due tovitaminK deficiency,WH O/FAO recommended thatallbreast-fedinfantsshould 
receivevitaminK supplementation as endorsed by WHO, whether inthe form of a single 
intramuscularinjection atbirthorm ultipleoraldoses givenoverthefirstfew we eks oflife.The 
provisionofvitaminK prophylaxis isastandardpracticeingovernment hospitalsinMalaysia 
(M inistry ofHealth,2002). 
293 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin K 
RNI forinfants 
0 -5 m onths 5 µg/day 
6 -11 m onths 10 µg/day 
Children and adolescents 
There w ere no dataavailableon w hich tobaseanEstimated Average Re quirement(EAR) 
for vitamin K for children and adolescents.Therefore,IOM (2001)setthe AIsbased on the 
highestmedian intakeforeachagegroup reported by theNHANES III.The AIforchildren (1-8 
yearsold)was estimated torangefrom 30-55µg/day;AIforolderchildren(9-13yearsold)was 
60µg/day;and AIforadolescents(14-18yearsold)w as75µg/day.The significantincrease in 
the AIfrom infancytoearly childhood ismos tlikelycontributed by increased intakes offruits 
and vegetablescontaininghigh vitamin K,asthe dietbecome s mor e diversified. 
O n theotherhand,WHO/ FAO expertconsultation(WHO/F AO,2004)recomme nded the 
R N Ifortheseagegroupsby adopting theRDA (1989) forvitamin K (intheUnitedStates),and 
AIlevel(inthe UK ),both ofwhich havebeen setatavalueof1 µg/kg body weight/day (DoH, 
1991).
RNI forchildren 
1 -3 years 15 µg/day 
4 -6 years 20 µg/day 
7 -9 years 25 µg/day 
RNI foradolescents 
Boys 10 -18 years 35 -55 µg/day 
G irls10 -18 years 35 -55 µg/day 
Adults 
IOM (2001)setthe AIvalues for adultsand elderly at120 µg/dayfor m en and at90 
µg/dayforw omen. Takinginto consideration possibleunderestimationofactualdailyintake of 
foods,theAIsforeach genderw ere derived from thehighestmedianintakevalue reported from 
N H AN ES III.
WH O /FAO expertconsultation(WH O/FAO 2004)recommende d theRNI foradultsand 
elderlygroups based on the daily intake of approximately 1 µg/kg body weight/dayof 
phylloquinone.The requirements forvitaminK inthepasthaveonlyconsidered itsclassical 
functioninblood coagulation.Withmore recentevidence demons tratinggreaterrequirements 
for the optimalcarboxylation ofvitamin K-dependentproteins in other tissues,thequestion 
remains w hether the R NIshould be raised.Studies have shown thatthe γ-carboxylationof 
osteocalcin can be improved by intakesofvitamin K between 100-420µg/day (Sokolletal., 
1997),w hichma y be even higher than the current intakes ofmo stpeopleintheU S or UK. 
294 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Vitam inK 
How ever,due tolackofclearly-defined m etabolicroleand biochemicalproofofthenecessity 
for fullyγ-carboxylated osteocalcin for bone healthat the time, the WH O /FAO expert 
consultationfeltitwas unwise toincreasetherecommendation then. 
RN I foradults 
Men 19 -65 years 65 µg/day 
Women 19 -65 years 55 µg/day 
RN I forelderly 
Men > 65 years 65 µg/day 
Women > 65 years 55 µg/day 
Pregnancy and Lactation 
Datapertainingto vitaminK statusof pregnantwomen are limited.How ever,lack of 
clinicaldeficiencysignsand comparablecirculatingvitaminK concentrations suggest that 
vitaminK status ofpregnantwomen isnotdifferentfrom thatofnon-pregnantpopulation.In 
addition,therewere no dataon thevitamin K contentoffetaltissue forestimatingadditional 
needs duringpregnancy(IOM,2001).Assessment ofphylloquinone dietary intakes among a 
nationallyrepresentative sampleofUS consumers using14-day food diaries,dataavailablefor 
a sm allgroup (n=17)ofpregnantwomen were found tobe similartothose ofnon-pregnant 
wom en (Booth,Webb and Peters,1999). Therefore,theAIwas setbased on me dianNH ANES 
IIIintakeestimatesofnon-pregnantwomen. 
Furthermore,available studies suggestthatthevitaminK statusoflactatingw omen is 
comp arable tothatofnon-lactating wom en.ReportedvitaminK intakesamong lactating wo m en 
(n=23)at6,12,and 26 weeks,were not significantlydifferent than non-lactatingwomen. In 
addition,no significantcorrelationw asfound between phylloquinone intake and breastmilk 
concentration (Greeretal., 19 91).Therefore,theAIwas estimatedtobe similartonon-pregnant 
wom en (IOM, 2001). 
WHO/ FAO expertconsultation(WHO /FAO,2004)also feltthatthere is no basis asyetfor 
makingdifferentrecom mendationsforpregnantand lactatingwom en.As such,theestimated 
R NIforthesegroups shallbe similarto those ofnon-pregnantand non-lactating wome n,w hich 
was derivedbased on adaily intakeof1 µg/kgbody weight/dayofphylloquinone. 
RN I for 
Pregnancy 55 µg/day 
Lactation 55 µg/day 
295 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin K 
D iscussions on revisedRNI for Malaysia 
There w ereno recom mendationsforV itaminK inthepreviousversionofthe Malaysian 
R NI (2005).The proposed recom mendations for the revised recom men ded intakesfor 
M alaysianRNI 2017 arebased on the WH O /FAO (2004)values.Other than for infants,the 
recomm ended intakesby WH O /FAO (2004)are generallylowerforallagegroupsascompared 
to the values adopted by IOM (2001).Thisisdue tothedifferentapproaches utilizedby these 
organisations inderivingtheirrecomm ended intakes.W HO/FA O (2004)settheirrecommended 
valuesforvitam in K based on adailyintakeof1 µg/kgbody w eight/dayofphylloquinoneforits 
classicalfunctioninblood coagulation.IOM (2001),on theother hand,settheirAIbased on 
the highestmedian intakevalues fordifferentage groups asreported by theN HA NES III.This 
contributes totheratherm arkeddifferences betwee n therecommende d values by WHO/FAO 
(2004)and IOM (2001). 
16.8 Tolerableupper intakelevels
N o toxicityhasbeen observed withhigh doses ofthe two naturalforms ofvitamin K: 
vitam insK 1 and K 2.Itis recognised thatno adverseeffectsoccurred ina small,short-term 
clinicaltrialof10mg ofK 1 perday(Craciunetal., 1998).H ence no tolerableupperintakelevel 
forthesetwo forms hasbeen established(IOM, 2001;Ex pertGroup on Vitaminsand Minerals, 
2003). 
Ho we ver,syntheticpreparation ofmen adione orits saltsshouldbe avoided fornutritional 
purposes,particularly for vitaminprophylaxis innewb orns as it has been associatedwith 
neonatalhaemo lysisand liverdamag e.Infantssuppleme nted w ithmenadione reportedtoxicity 
effectssuch asjaundice,hyperbilirubinem iaandanemia(Gropper,Smith& Groff,2012).B ased 
on EFSA Expe rtP anel(EFS A,2008),the lowest observed adverse effect level (LOAE L) 
recomm ended forvitamin K 2 intakeis20 m g/kg BW/ day. 
16.9 ResearchRecomm endations
The followingpriorityareasofresearch arerecommend ed: 
• Bioavailabilityofdietaryphylloquinone and m enaquinones from localfoods 
• Significance ofmenaquinones to human requirements forvitaminK 
• The physiologicalroles of vitamin K-dependent proteins in functions other than 
coagulation 
• The significance ofunder-carboxylated vitam inK-dependentproteins and suboptimal 
vitamin K statustobone and cardiovascularhealth 
296 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Vitam inK 
16.10 References 
Beulens JWJ, Booth SL,vanden Heuvel EGHM, StoecklinE, Baka A,V ermeer C (2013).Theroleof 
m enaquinones(vitamin K2)inhuman health.BrJ Nutr 110:1357-68 
B ooth SL,W ebb Dr,Pe ters JC (199 9).Assessme nt of phylloquinone and dihydrophylloquinone 
dietaryintakes among anationallyrepresentativesampleofU Sconsumers using 14-dayfood 
diaries.J Am DietAssoc. 99:1072-76 
B uchanan GS, Melvin T,Mer ritB, B ishop C, Shuler FD (2016). Vitamin K2 (me naquinone) 
suppleme ntation and its benefotsin cardiovascular disease,osteoporosis,and cancer. 
Mar shallJournalofM edicine. 2(3):53-65 
Cockayne S,Adamson J,Lanham-New S,ShearerMJ, GilbodyS,TorgersonDJ (2006).VitaminK 
and the preventionoffractures:Systematicreview and meta-analysis ofrandomized controlled 
clinicaltrials.Arch Intern Me d. 24:2499-507. 
CraciunAM, WolfJ,KnapenM H, B rounsF,V ermeer C (1998).Improvedbone metabolisminfemale 
elite athletesaftervitamin K supplementation.IntJ SportsM ed.19:479-484 
DepartmentofHealth(DoH).(1991).Dietaryreference values forfood energyand nutrientsforthe 
United Kingdom. Comm itteeon MedicalAspectsofFood P olicy.R eporton Healthand Social 
Subjects41. 
EFSA (2008).VitaminK 2 added fornutritionalpurposesinfoods forparticularnutritionaluses,food 
supplements and foods intended for the generalpopulation and vitamin K 2 as a source of 
vitaminK added fornutritionalpurposesto foodstuffs,in thecontextofRegulation (EC) No. 
258/971,ScientificOpinionofthePanel on DieteticProducts,Nutrition and Allergies.EFSA 
Journal. 822:1-31. 
E FS A (2009 ).Scientific Op inion on the substantiationof health claims related to vitamin K and 
maintenanceofbone,bloodcoagulation,andfunctionofthe heartand blood vesselspursuant 
to Article13(1)ofRegulation(EC )No 1924/2006.EFSA Journal. 7(9):1228 
E xpertGroup on Vitamins and Minerals,Commi tteeon Toxicity(2003).Safe Upper Levelsfor 
Vitaminsand M inerals. London: Food StandardsAgency Publications. 
G arber AK,BinkleyNC ,KruegerDC,SuttieJW (1999).Comparison ofphylloquinone bioavailability 
from food sources orasupplementinhuman subjects. J Nutr. 129:1201-1203 
G reerFR ,M arshallS,CherryJ,Suttie JW (199 1).VitaminK statusoflactating mothers,hum anmilk, 
and breastfeedinginfants.Pediatrics .88:751-756 
G undberg CM, LianJB,B oothSL (2012).VitaminK-dependentcarboxylation ofosteocalcin:Friend 
or foe?Adv Nu tr. 3:149-157 
H uang ZB, Wan SL,Lu YJ,Ning L,LiuC (2015).Does vitamin K2 playarolein thepreventionand 
treatment of osteoporosisfor postmeno pausalwo me n: a m eta-analysis of random ized 
controlledtrials.Osteoporosis International. 26(3):1175-86 
297 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin K 
Institute ofMe dicine (2001).VitaminK. In:Dietary Re ference Intakes for Vitamin A,Vitam inK, 
Arsenic,Boron,Chromium, Copper,Iodine,Iron,Manganese,Molybdenum, Nickel,Silicon, 
V anadium ,andZinc.Food andNutritionB oard,InstituteofMe dicine.NationalAcademy Press. 
WashingtonDC .Chapter5pp 162-196. 
Kamao M, SuharaY,Tsugawa N, Uw ano M ,YamaguchiN ,U enishiK (2007).Vitamin K contentof 
foods and dietary vitamin K intakein Japanese young wom en. J NutriSci Vitaminol. 
53(6):464-70 
Knapen MH, Braam LA,Drumm en NE, VerneerC (2015).Men aquinone-7supplem entation improves 
arterialstiffness inhealthypostmenopausalw omen: A double-blind randomized clinicaltrial. 
Throm bosis and H aem ostasis. 113(5):1135-1144 
M inistryofHealth(2002).NeonatalV itaminK Administration atBirth -R eport.HealthTechnology 
Assessm ent U nit, Me dical Developme nt Division, Ministry of He alth M alaysia 
MOH/P AK /48.02(TR):1-15 
Pu ckett R M & Offringa M (2000).Pr ophylacticvitam in K for vitam in K deficiency bleeding in 
neonates.Cochrane Da tabase ofSystem aticReviews. Issue4:CD002776. 
Schurgers LJ,Teunissen KJF,H amulyak K,Knapen MHJ ,Vik H, Ve rm eer C (2007).Vitam inK- 
containing dietary supplements: Comparison of synthetic vitamin K 1 and natto-derived 
menaquinone-7.Blood .109 (8):3279-83 
Riaz IB, R iaz H ,Riaz T,Rahman S,Am irM ,B adshah MB ,KaziAN (2012).Role ofvitamin K2 in 
preventingtherecurrencehepatocellularcarcinomaaftercurativetreatment:ameta-analysis 
ofrandomizedcontrolledtrials.BM C G astroenterology. 12:170-179 
ShearerMJ (1992).V itaminK metabolismand nutriture.Blood R ev. 6(2):92-104. 
Shearer M J,Fu X ,Booth SL (2012).Vitamin K nutrition,me tabolism, and requireme nts: Current 
conceptsand futureresearch.Adv.N utr. 3:182-195 
SokollLJ,Booth SL,O’BrienME, DavidsonKW, TsaiounKI,SadowskiJA (1997).Changesinserum 
osteocalcin,plasma phylloquinone,andurinaryγ-carboxylglutamicacidin response toaltered 
intakesofdietaryphylloquinoneinhuman subjects.Am J ClinN utr 65:779-784. 
USD A NationalNutrient Databasefor StandardRe ference,R elease 28 (2015).US Departmentof 
Ag riculture,Agricultural R esearch Service,Nu trient Data Laboratory. Ve rsion Current: 
September 2015.Internet:http://ww w.ars.usda.gov/ba/bhnrc/ndl. 
WH O (2013).Gu idelineson Maternal,N ewborn, Child,and AdolescentHealth: recommendat ions 
on Newborn Health.World HealthOrganization.
WH O/FA O (2004).VitaminK In: VitaminandMineralReq uiremen tsinHuma n Nu trition(2 nd ed.)WH O 
and F AO ofthe UnitedNations.Geneva,Switzerland;pp 108-126
Zhong JH, Mo XS,X iangB D,Yuan WP ,Jiang JF,Xie GS,LiLQ (2013).Po stoperativeuse ofthe 
chemopr eventive vitamin K2 analog inpatientswithhepatocellularcarcinoma.PloSOn e. 8(3): 
e58082 
298 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Vitam inK 
M alaysia (20 17) W H O/FA O (20 0 4) IOM (20 0 1) 
A ge group RNI (µg/day) A ge group RNI (µg/day) A ge group RNI (µg/day) 
A ppendix 16 .1:C om parison ofRecom m ended Intake forVitam in K:RNI M alaysia (20 17),RNI ofW H O/FA O (20 0 4)and A I ofIOM (20 0 1) 
Infants Infants Infants 
0 -5m onths 5 0 -6 m onths 5 0 -6 m onths 2.0 
6 -11 m onths 10 7 -12 m onths 10 6 -12 m onths 2.5 
C hildren C hildren C hildren 
1 -3 years 15 1 -3 years 15 1 -3 years 30 
4 -6 years 20 4 -6 years 20 4 -8 years 55 
7 -9 years 25 7 -9 years 25 
M ales 
A dolescents A dolescents 9 -13 years 60 
B oys (10 -18 years) 35-55 M ales (10 -18 years) 35-55 14 -18 years 75 
G irls (10 -18 years) 35-55 F em ales (10 -18 years) 35-55 19 -30 years 120 
31 -50 years 120 
A dults A dults 51 -70 years 120 
M en (19 -65years) 65 M ales (19 – 65years) 65 > 70 years 120 
M en (> 65years) 65 M ales (65+years) 65 
W om en (19 -65years) 55 F em ales (19 – 65years) 55 Fem ales 
W om en (> 65years) 55 F em ales (65+years) 55 9 -13 years 60 
14 -18 years 75 
299 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Vitamin K 
M alaysia (20 17) W H O/FA O (20 0 4) IOM (20 0 1) 
A ge group RNI (µg/day) A ge group RNI (µg/day) A ge group RNI (µg/day) 
Pregnancy 55 PregnantW om en 55 19 -30 years 9 0 
31 -50 years 9 0 
Lactation 55 Lactating W om en 55 51 -70 years 9 0 
> 70 years 9 0 
Pregnancy 
14 -18 years 75 
19 -30 years 9 0 
31 -50 years 9 0 
Lactation 
14 -18 years 75 
19 -30 years 9 0 
31 -50 years 9 0 
300 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Summ ary 
M ineralsand TraceElements
Recommen dations 
The TechnicalSub-Comm ittee(TSC)on Mineralsand TraceE lements conducted extensive reviews 
thatincludedpublishedliterature forscientificupdates,technicalguides and docume ntson dietary 
intakerecomm endationsofglobalauthoritative agencies and recommen dations forenergy andnutrient 
intakesofvariouscountries. 
The TSC agreed to adopt the recom m endationsofW HO/ FAO (2004)asa priority.H owever,for 
minerals and trace elements thatthe WH O/FAO didnothaveavailable guidelines,the recommendations 
ofIOM (various years)were used instead.In addition,review ofrecentdietaryintakerecommendations 
ofES FA (2010),aswellasthose ofcountriesintheregion,Australia(2006),Japan (2015)and the 
Philippines(2015)were alsodone.
The TSC made thedecision toinclude besides calcium(RNI,2005),fournew mineralsnamely, 
phosphorus,sodium,potassium and magnesium forthe (RNI,2017).From theninetrace elements, 
four (iron,iodine,zinc and selenium (RNI2005)we re retained and five new elements,chromium , 
copper,m anganese,molybdenum and fluoridew ere included. The scope oftheminerals and trace 
elements recom mended by internationalauthorities and various AsiaPacificcountries(Table1)show ed 
wide coverageand the proposed MalaysiaRNI (2017)is alignedw iththese recentdevelopments. 
Table 1.Com parisonofthescope ofrecommended intakes ofm ineralsand trace elements 
MalaysiaRNI 2017 √√√√√√√ √√√ √√√√
Philippines2015 √√√√√ -- √√√ -- √√
Japan 2015 √√√√√√ √ - √√ √√√ √
Australia2006 √√√√√√√ √√√ √√√√
WH O/FAO 2004 √√√√√ -- --- √ -- -
IOM (variousyears) √√√√√√√ √√√ √√√√
ESF A DR Vs 2010 √√√√√√ √ √ - √√ √ - √
Ca Fe I Se Zn C r C u FK Mg Mo Mn Na P
301 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
17 • Calcium 
17.1 Introduction 
Calcium isthe fifthmo stabundantelement inthe huma n body,w ithapproximately1000 
g presentinadults.Itplaysa key roleinskeletalmineralization,asw ellas a w iderangeof 
biologic functions.Nearlyall(99%) ofthisisinthe skeleton.The remainder isinthe teeth 
(0.6%),the softtissues (0.6%),the plasma (0.03%)and theextracellularfluid (0.06%).Calcium 
isanessentialelementthatis onlyavailabletothebody through dietary sources. 
17.2 Functions 
Calcium playsakey rolein awide rangeofbiologicfunctions,either intheform ofits 
free ionor bou nd com plexes.One of the m ostimportantfunctions as bound calciumisto 
providea “structuralrole”inprovidingrigidity(structure and strength)to theskeleton.This 
functionisprovided by aform ofcalcium phosphatethatisgenerallyknown ashydroxyapatite 
[Ca 10 (OH ) 2(P O 4)6]crystals which areemb edded incollagen fibrils.Inbone,calcium serves two 
m ain purposes: itprovides skeletalstrength and,concurrently,provides a dynam ic storeto 
m aintaintheintra-and extracellularcalcium pools(Munro,2010).
Calcium ions on thesurfaceofbone caninteractwithions inbody fluidsand actlikea 
large ionexchanger.These propertiesareimpor tantinrelationtotheroleofbone as areserve 
of calciumto help maintaina constantconcentration of blood calcium. Blood calcium is 
responsibleforaw iderangeofessentialfunctions,includingextra-and intracellularsignaling, 
nerve impulsetransmission,and muscle contraction(Campbe ll1990; B ootman etal., 2001). 
Serum calciumranges from 2.2to 2.6m mol/linhealthy subjects.Itcomp risesfree ions(51%), 
protein-boundcom plexes (40%),and ionic comp lexes(9%).The concentration of serum 
ionized calciumis tightly maintainedwithinaphysiologic range of1.10to 1.35m m ol/L toavoid 
calciumtoxicity.N onionized calcium isbound toa varietyofproteinsand anions inboth the 
extra-and intracellularpools.The m aincalciumbindingproteinsincludealbuminand globulin 
in serum and calmodulin and othercalcium-binding proteins in the cell.The major ionic 
com plexesinserum arecalcium phosphate,calcium carbonate,and calcium oxalate. 
17.3 M etabolism 
Calcium requireme ntisdependenton the state ofcalciumm etabolism,w hichisregulated 
by three ma inmec hanisms: intestinalabsorption,renalreabsorption,andbone turnover.These 
inturn areregulatedby asetofinteractinghormone s,includingparathyroidhormone (PTH) , 
1,25-dihydroxyvitaminD (1,25(OH) 2D),ionized calcium itself,andtheircorresponding receptors 
inthe gut,kidney,and bone. 
A decreaseinserum calcium inactivates thecalciumreceptors intheparathyroidglands 
to increasePTH secretion,which acts on the PT H receptorinthe kidney to increasetubular 
calcium reabsorption,and in bone to increase netbone resorption.The increased PTH also 
stimulates the kidney toincreasesecretion of1,25(OH) 2D,w hich activates the vitam in D receptor 
in guttoincrease calcium absorption,in theparathyroid glandstodecrease P TH secretion,and 
bone to increaseresorption.With arisein serum calcium,these actionsarereversed,and the 
integrated hormon alresponse reduces serum calcium.Together,these negative feedback 
m echanisms helpto m aintaintotalserum calciumlevelsinhealthy individualswithinarelatively 
narrow physiologicrangeof10%. 
A schem aticdiagramofcalcium homeostasis canbe seen below.
302 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
C alcium 
7-dehydroxycholesterol 
G ut 
• Ca,P O4 
absorption 
Vit.D3 
1,25-(OH )2-D3 
25-hydroxylase (liver) 
UV light 
↓ C a 
PTH 
Parathyroid 
gland 
Negative 
feedback 
I-hydroxylase 
(kidney) 
P roposed 
synergy 
Negative 
feedback 
Kidney 
• Caresorption 
• P O4 excretion 
• I-hydroxylase 
Bone 
• Ca,P O4 
resorption 
↑ C a 
↓ PO4 
Source:G arth FE (2016).http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/874690-overview (accessed 
10/3/17) 
Dietaryintake and absorptionprovide sufficientcalcium to m aintain healthy body stores. 
Absorptionoccursmostly in theduodenum and the jejunum.Calciumabsorptionisafunction 
of activetransportthatiscontrolled by 1-25(OH) 2D,w hich isparticularly importantatlow 
calciumintakes,and passive diffusion,which dom inates athigh calcium intakes (Br onner, 
2009).Typically,atnormalcalcium intake,1-25(OH) 2D-dependent transportaccountsforthe 
majorityofabsorption,whereasaslittleas8 to 23% ofoverallcalciumabsorptionis caused by 
passive diffusion (McCor mick,2002).The rateofparacellularcalcium uptakeisconsidered 
non-saturable,whiletranscellulartransportcanbe upregulatedunderconditions oflow calcium 
303 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
C alcium 
intake.Recent evidence suggeststhatparacellularcalcium transportisalso regulated,atleast 
in part,by 1-25(OH) 2 vitamin D (Christakos,2012).Since a concentration gradientis nota 
prerequisitefor thisprocess,transcellular transportaccountsfor most ofthe absorptionof 
calciumatlow and moderate intakelevels.
Calcium is excreted in urine,feces,and body tissues and fluids,such asswe at.Calcium 
excretioninthe urineisa function of the balance between the calcium load filtered by the 
kidneysand theefficiencyofreabsorption from therenaltubules.Mos tofthecalcium(-98%) 
isreabsorbedby eitherpassive or active processes occurringatfour sitesinthekidney,each 
contributing toma intainingneutralcalciumbalance.The ma jorityofthefiltered calcium (-70%) 
is reabsorbed passively in the proximaltubuleandthe rem aining 30% activelyin the ascending 
loopofHenle,thedistaltubule,and collectingduct (Munr o,2010). 
High intakes ofsodium increase urinary calcium excretion.Incontrast,addingm ore 
potassium to a high-sodium diet m ighthelp decrease calcium excretion,particularlyin 
postmenopausalw omen (Sellmeyer etal., 2002).Studies on hum an subjectshave shown that 
calcium(Ca)caninhibitiron(Fe)absorption.B othmineralsbindtoatransporteron the surface 
ofintestinalabsorptive cells,but w hereasnon-haem iron entersthe cellsthisway,calcium 
hinders further entry of the iron.This effect is m ainly relevant when calcium and iron 
supplemen tsaretaken together.H ow ever,athorough reviewofstudies on humans inwh ichCa 
intake w as substantially increased for long periods shows no changes in hematological 
m easures or indicatorsofiron status.Thus,theinhibitoryeffectma y be ofshortdurationand 
therealsom aybe com pensatorymechanisms (Lönnerdal2010;Lynch,2000). 
17.4 Sources 
Dietary calcium comes from food sources associated withdairy products,other foods 
such asvegetablesand cereals,foods fortified withinorganicor organic calcium, and from 
dietarysupplementscontaining calcium.
O ther than milk and dairy products,calcium-richfoods inthe Malaysiandietcan be 
obtainedfrom fish withedible bones such ascanned sardinesand anchovies,beansand bean 
productsincluding yellow dhal,tofu andtem peh (fermented soybeans),locallyprocessed foods 
such as shrimp paste,cincaluk and budu ,as wellas vegetableslikespinach,watercress, 
m ustard leaves,cekurmanis, tapiocaleaves,kai-lan and broccoli(Tee etal., 1997).Currently, 
food manu facturers in Malaysiahave also mad e available in the m arketcalcium fortified 
productssuch as high-calciumm ilk,yogurt,breakfastcereals,biscuitsand even rice.Table 
17.1below show s calciumcontentoflocalfoodsinMalaysia. 
Table 17.1: C alcium contentoffoods 
304 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
C alcium 
Food m g/100g 
Milk and milkproducts 
High-calciummilkpowder 2000 
Skimmed milkpow der 1169 
Low fatcheese 489 
Low FatMilk 132 
Low-fatyoghurt 127 
Fu ll-cream milk 109 
Meat,fish,poultry,legumes, nuts 
Ikanbilis(driedwithouthead & entrails) 500 
Sardine(canned) 234 
Almo nds 222 
Cooked dhal 171 
Tofu 135 
Tempeh 69 
Mussels 62 
Baked beans 40 
Soybeanm ilk 20 
Vegetables 
Watercress(sai-yongcoy) 200 
Kale,Chinese( kailancoy) 179 
Mustardgreen (sawi), 138 
Spinach 69 
Calciumfortifiedproducts 
High-calciumsoybeanmilk 180 
Enriched bread 167 
Orangejuice(calciumfortified) 146 
R ef:Tee etal. (1997)
305 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
C alcium 
B ioavailabilityofcalcium from plantfoods however canbe affected by calcium chelators 
such as oxalateand phytate.Ox alicacidsarefound in high amou nts in plant foods such as 
spinach,chocolateorcocoaproductsand inlesserquantitiesindriedbeans,sw eetpotato,tea 
infusion,wheatgerm,kale,okraandsoybeanproducts.H ow ever,aclinicalstudyin huma ns has 
show n thatcalcium absorptionfrom low -oxalatehighcalciumdark green vegetablesfrom the 
kalespeciesiscom parabletom ilk(H eaney& W eaver,1990).The authors concluded thatthe 
bioavailabilityfrom otherBrassica familyvegetablessuch asbroccoli,mustard green,Chinese 
kale(kailan) and cabbagecanbe consideredas good as milk. 
17.5 Deficiencies 
Indicators ofdietary calcium intakes includecalcium balance (i.e.,calciumaccretion, 
retention,and loss)which canbe measured usingstableisotopestechniques.Howev er,bone 
m ineraldensity canbe considered assurrogatemarkeroffractureriskand calciumstatus. 
Inadequateintake,poor calciumabsorptionand excessive calcium losses contributeto 
reduced mineralization ofbone.A reduction in absorbed calcium causes serum ionized calcium 
concentrationtodecline.Thisstimulatesthe parathyroidhormone (PTH) thatwillactinone of 
threeways toincreaseand maintain thelevelofserum calcium.The parathyroidhormone can 
increasethe production ofcalcitriol(1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol),wh ichinturnincreases 
calciumabsorptionthroughactivetransportin thegutand tubularreabsorptioninthe kidneys. 
Bo ne resorption m ayalso increaseleading to mo recalcium being released from the bone.Thus, 
P TH ma intains norm alcirculating calcium concentration during calcium deprivation. Itisnoted 
nonetheless;this isdone atthe expense ofskeletalmass. 
Sincemo re than 99 % ofbody Caispresentinthe skeleton,anadequate Caintakeduring 
the grow thperiod may be criticalinm aximizingbone m ineralcontent.Onc e calciumintake is 
adequate to preventrickets(disorderedorganizationofthecartilage ma trix)or osteoma lacia 
(defectivebone mineralization),provisionofadditionalcalciummay increase bone densityby 
affectingbone turnoverand the size oftheremode lingspace.A systematicreview concluded 
thatincreased calcium /dairy intakesignificantlyincreases totalbody and lum barspinebone 
m ineralcontentinchildrenwith low baselineintakes (Hu ncharek etal., 2008). 
Chroniccalcium deficiencydue toinadequateintake orpoor intestinalabsorptionisone 
ofthecausesofreduced bone mass and osteoporosis.Osteoporosisisdefinedasa skeletal 
diseasecharacterized by reduced bone mass,increased bone fragility and susceptibilityto 
fracture (W H O,199 4).The clinicaland publichealthimpactofosteoporosisstems from its 
associationwithfracturesofthehip,spine and forearm.
There isadearthofinformationon the incidence ofhipfractures inMalaysia.The Kuala 
Lum pur H ospital(HKL) had reportedtheincidence ofhipfractures in1981 as0.49per1,000 
and therateincreasedto0.70per 1,000in1989 (Lee,Sidhu& Pan 1993).Inthatreport,the 
investigators also reported ethnicdifferences inadm issions for hipfractures inHKL ,inthat 
Chinese accounted for58% followed by Indians (27%) and Malays(15%).In2001,hipfracture 
incidence from hospitalrecords was reported to be the highest amo ng Chinese (men 
9 4/100,000,wo me n 220/100,000)followed by Indians(m en 9 8/100,000,wo men 204/100,000) 
and M alays(m en 27/100,000,women 43 /100000)(Lau etal., 2001).The mos trecentdata 
reported thatthe incidence ofhipfracturesinMalaysiaranges from 10/100,000population 
from age 50years oldto 510/100,000 populations atage above 75yearsold with a sharp 
increase atage 65yearsand above.Similarly,theChinese had thehighestincidence ofhip 
fractures compa red to the Malays and Indians.Chinesewo me n accounted for44.8% ofhip 
fractures.(Lee & Khir,2007). 
Cross sectionalsurveys inMalaysiaoftenreportlow calciumintakesamon g various 
population.The me dianintakeofcalcium am ong Malaysians was reportedtobe 353mg (men 
374mg; wom en 333mg) by the M alaysianAdultNutritionSurvey (InstituteofPublicHea lth 
2014).The SE ANUT Sstudy reported thatm orethanone-third didnotachievethe M alaysianR N I 
in2005forcalciumin children aged 6 months to12 years(Poh etal., 2013). 
Systematic reviews published on theeffects ofcalcium inhealth anddiseaseshowed that 
ingeneral,low calcium intake isnotassociatedwithhigherrisk ofmany non-skeletalconditions 
(Chung et al., 2009; Uusi-Rasi1 et al.2013).Amon g hypertensive adults, calcium 
supplementation(400to2000mg/d)lowered systolic,but not diastolic,blood pressure by a 
smallbutstatisticallysignificantamo unt(2to4 m m Hg).For body w eight,despite aw ide range 
ofcalciumintakes(from supplements orfrom dairyand nondairy sources)acrossthecalcium 
trials,therandomized controlled trialswere fairlyconsistentinfindingno significanteffectof 
increasedcalciumintakeon body weight.
There was alsono overalleffectofcalciumintake on cancers,although forbreastcancer, 
subgroup analysesin fourcohortstudies consistentlyfoundthatcalciumintake intherange of 
780to1750mg/d in premenopausalwom en was associated withadecreased riskforbreast 
cancer. How ever,no RC Ts of calcium supplementation to prevent breast cancer in 
prem enopausalwo men havebeen published. For prostatecancer,three offourcohortstudies 
found significantassociationsbetween highercalciumintake (>1500or >2000mg /day)and 
increasedriskofprostatecancer,com paredtomen consum ingloweramount ofcalcium(500- 
1000mg/day). 
On cardiovascularhealth,sixcohortstudies ofcalcium intake suggestthatinpopulations 
atrelativelyincreasedrisk ofstrokeand withrelativelylow dietarycalciumintake (i.e.,inEast 
Asia),lowerlevelsofcalciumintakeunder about700mg/dayare associated withhigherriskof 
stroke.Thisassociation,howe ver,was notreplicatedinEurope ortheUS,andone Finnish study 
found apossibleassociationofincreased riskofstroke inmen w ithcalcium intakes above 1000 
mg.
On immuno logicdisorders;and pregnancy-related outcomes including preeclampsia, 
there were eitherfew studies or findings were inconsistent. 
17.6 Factorsaffectingcalciumrequirement 
The body’s need forcalcium relativeto skeletalgrowth and rem odelingvariesby life 
stage.The major physiologicalactivities includebone accretionduringskeletalgrowth and 
maintenanceofbone mass aftergrowth iscomp leted.Infancy throughlateadolescence periods 
arecharacterized by positive calcium balancedue toenhanced bone formation.Afterpuberty 
and throughoutm ostofadulthood,bone formationand resorptionare balanced.Duringthis 
306 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
C alcium 
307 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
C alcium 
period,bone m assisconsolidated,and calciumrequireme ntsare relativelystable.Laterinlife, 
m enopause and age-related bone loss lead to a net loss ofcalcium due to enhanced bone 
resorption. 
During pregnancy,thefoetalneed forcalcium ismet by maternalphysiologicalchanges, 
prima rily throughincreased calcium absorption.Calcium isactivelytransportedacross the 
placentafrom mo thertofoetus,anessentialactivity tom ineralizing thefetalskeleton.Intestinal 
calciumabsorptionofthemother doubles inpregnancy (Kovacs,2005).Inteenagepregnancy, 
w hose skeleton is stillgrowing,pregnancy could theoretically reduce peak bone mass and 
increasethelong-termriskofosteoporosis.
H um an breastmilkis thesole dietarysource ofcalciumtotheinfantand most ofthe 
calciumpresentinmilk was derivedfrom thematernalskeleton.M aternalbone resorptionis 
m arkedlyup-regulated(Speckeretal.1994 ;Kalkwarfetal.1997),and itappearsthatma ternal 
BM D can decline5to 10percentduringthe2-to 6-monthtime periodofexclusive breastfeeding. 
H ow ever,itnorm allyreturnsto baseline duringthe6 to 12 months post-w eaning (Kalkwarf, 
1999) .Thus,inthelongterm,ahistoryoflactationdoes notappeartoincreasetheriskoflow 
BMD orosteoporosis.The normallossofBMD duringlactation and thepost-lactationrecovery 
occurs inadolescents aswell(Chantryetal., 2004).
P roteinintakestimulatesacidreleaseinthestom ach,and this,inturn,enhancescalcium 
absorption.Ho w ever,ithas long been known that protein also increasesurinarycalcium 
excretion.Itisestimated thatforeverygram ofproteinm etabolized,urinaryexcretionofcalcium 
increases by 50% or0.025mm olcalcium takenout.N evertheless,wh ileproteinintakeappears 
to increase urinary calcium excretion,the effectofprotein on calcium retention is controversial. 
W hileseveralobservationaland clinicalstudieshave show n thatahigherproteinintake (84to 
152g/day)w aspositively associatedwithchange infemoralneck and spineB MD (Shapese & 
Sukum ar2010),other epidem iologicalstudies suggestthathigh proteindiets reduce bone 
ma ss;thishasbeen attributed to a higher acidload,leading to a buffering response by the 
skeleton andgreaterurinarycalcium excretion.A me ta-analysis(Darlingetal., 2009)concluded 
thatthere isa smallbenefitof protein for bone health,but the benefitmay not necessarily 
translate into reduced fracture risk in the long term.IOM (2011)has notadjusted calcium 
requirement based on protein intake. 
High intakes ofsodium increase urinary calciumexcretion.Incontrast,adding m ore 
potassium to a high-sodium diet m ighthelp decrease calcium excretion,particularlyin 
postmen opausalw omen (Sellmeyeretal., 2002).Ho wever,available evidence does notwarrant 
differentcalciumintakerequirements forindividualsaccordingto theirsaltconsumption. 
Caffeine from coffeeand tea mod estly increases calcium excretion and reduces 
absorption (Heaney & Re cker 1982;B ergman etal., 19 9 0).Tw o studieshave indicatedthat 
caffeineintake(two tothreeor more cups ofcoffee perday)willresultinbone loss,but only 
in individualswith low milk or low totalcalcium intake (Barrett-Connor etal. 1994; Harris& 
Dawson-Hughes,1994).The addition ofmilkintocoffeecouldame lioratetheadverse effectof 
caffeine.
High dietary intake ofphosphorus gives rise to high blood phosphatelevels which in 
turn,reduce the formation ofcalcitriolinthe kidneys,reduce blood calcium and lead to elevated 
levelsofPTH thatmay be detrimentalon bone m ineralcontent.Severalobservationalstudies 
havesuggestedthattheconsumption ofcarbonatedsoftdrinks w ithhighlevelsofphosphate 
isassociatedwith reduced bone m assand increasedfracture risk,but this ismor e likelydue 
to the displacemen tofm ilkwith the carbonateddrinks,rather than the phosphorous itself 
(H eaney& Rafferty,2001). 
Som e epidemiologicalevidencesuggests thatvegetarians had higher bone loss than 
omnivoresdue to the limited quantities ofprotein,calcium,and phosphorusin theirdiet(W eaver 
et al., 1999). In a study of the Seven-Day Adventists (SDAs),however, no significant 
relationshipsor trendswere found between earlyor currentdietary intake and bone mineral 
contentinthatpopulation.
Lacto-ovovegetariansshouldbe ableto obtainadequatecalciumintake from milk and 
milkproducts.Veg ans wh o eatonlyplant-based dietmay havechallenges m eeting calcium 
requirem entsand should be awarethatthebioavailabilityofcalciummay be lowerdue toplant 
constituents thatcanimpede calcium absorption. 
17.7 Settingrequireme nts and recomm ended intakesofcalcium 
Calcium requirements are best derived from balancestudies,wh ich is a careful 
measurement ofcalcium absorbedand calcium losses across arangeofcalciumintakes.The 
intake which providesjustenough absorbed calcium to meet losses(zero balance)isthen 
derived and setasthe me an calcium requireme nt ofan adult.In children,adolescence and 
pregnancy,the factorialapproachisused toestimatecalciumrequirementbecause thesegroups 
need tobe inpositivecalcium balance.
The m ainreferencein arrivingatthisrevisedrecomm ended intake for calcium for 
Malaysiansisthe updated Institute ofMe dicine,USA (IOM)DR Irecommendations in 2011and 
the existingF AO/WHO (2002)reference.No otherregionalRN IsnorupdatedFA O/WH O dataare 
availableatthis pointin time. There areno known localstudies on calcium requirements of 
commun ities but severallocalstudies on calciumintake,bone mineraldensityand calcium 
suppleme ntation conducted locallyhasbeen published(Chee etal. 2002;Chee etal. 2003;Esra 
etal.2014;Suriawatietal. 2016). 
Infants 
The optimal source ofcalcium duringthefirstyear oflifeishuma n milk.No evidence 
show s thatexceeding thecalcium intake oftheexclusivelybreastfedterm infantduringthe first 
6 months oflifeortheintakeofthebreastfedinfantsupplemented withsolidfoodsduringthe 
second 6 m onthsoflifeisbeneficialtoachievinglong-termincreases inbone mineralization. 
Calciumrequirementsforinfantsarepresumed tobe met by human milk(IOM,1997).There 
areno functionalcriteriafor calcium status thatreflectresponse to calciumintakeininfants 
308 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
C alcium 
309 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
C alcium 
(IOM ,1997 ).AccordingtoIOM (2011),dataare notsufficienttoestablish anestimated average 
requirement (EA R )forinfants0 to6 and 7 to12 mont hs ofage,and thereforeadequateintake 
(AIs)have been developed based on theavailableevidence. 
B asedon infantweighingstudies,areasonableaverage amoun tofbreastmilkconsumed 
is780mL/day.The averagelevelofcalcium w ithinaliterofbreastmilkis259mg (± 59mg). 
Itisthereforeestimated thatthe intakeofcalciumforinfantsfedexclusivelyhuman milkis202 
m g/day(IOM,2011). 
The dailyincrem entofcalcium intheskeleton inthe first2 years oflifeis about 100 
m g/day.The urinary calcium lossisabout10 mg/day.Therefore,infantsneed toabsorb about 
120m g ofcalcium per day fornormalgrowth.Absorptionofcalciumisassume d tobe 60% 
from human breastm ilk,wh ile thatfrom infantformu lais lower at40%.Itis estimated therefore 
breastfedinfantswith anintakeofabout202mg /day w ouldbe ableto me etthe requiredamou nt 
ofabsorbed calcium of120mg, and formulafed babies would require an intakeof250mg/day 
ofcalcium(IOM,2011). 
B ased on the above,the proposed AIforinfants (0-6m onths)who areexclusively 
breastfed issetat200m g calcium/day.Similarly,forformula-fed babies,the AIamount isset 
higherat250mg calcium/day.
As intake ofsolidfoods increases for infantsaged 6-12 months,calcium intake from 
breast m ilkdecreases.There is also low er calcium concentration ofbreastm ilkat6 to 12 
m onthsoflactation.H ence,calcium requireme ntforthisage group isexpected tobe derived 
increasinglyfrom solid foods.IOM (2011)had proposed theAIforinfants6-12 months tobe 
260m g calcium/day.
The figure is derived by assum ing thatmean hum an milkintake during the second
6 mont hs oflifew ould be lower at600ml/day(Dewey etal.,1984).The calciumconcentration 
inthe milk isassumed tobe 200mg/L (Atkinsonetal., 1995)hence theinfantw ouldconsume 
120 mg /dayof calcium.The estimated calcium intake from solid food was assumed to be
140m g /dayand this givesatotalof260mg/day. 
A I forinfants
0 -6 m onths breastfed 200 mg/day 
formulafed 250 mg/day 
7 -12 m onths 260 mg/day 
Children and adolescents 
The am ountofcalciumthatisaccumulated inyoung children ismainlyforbone growth. 
Severalstudiesamong Asianchildren in Ho ng Kong show ed thatthosewithhabituallyhigher 
calcium intakesduring thefirst5yearsoflifehad significantly higher bone m ineralcontent 
(Lee etal., 1993) than inchildrenwithlower calcium intakes oflessthan 400mg/day.Lee & 
Leung (199 5)also showed thatamon gst7-yearoldHong Kong Chinese children who habitually 
consum e a low calcium diet (280 mg/day),gainsinradialbone density (3.1% m ore than 
controls)w ere seen when supplemented with300m g/daycalcium carbonatefor18 months. 
No localstudiesexistfor measuringbone calcium accretioninyoung children. 
The IOM (2011)recommendation provided scientificdatame asuringcalciumbalance 
and hence,derive estimated totalintake needed forbone accrualacross severalage groups.F or 
childrenaged 1-3 yearsold,Lynch etal. (2007)suggestedatargetaverage calciumretention 
levelof142 mg/day,consistentw iththegrowth needs ofthis lifestage group.Through the 
factorialmethod,acalcium intakeof474mg/dayisestimatedtome etthisneed.An estimated 
EA R w as,established as500mg ofcalcium perday,rounded from 474mg/day.An assumption 
specifiedby Lynch etal.(2007)is thatanadditional30percentcalciumretention would meet 
the needs of97.5percentofthis age group.Thisresults inanestimated RNI forcalcium of700 
mg/daycalciumforthisage-group.
Similarly,forchildren aged4 to8 yearsold,Abrams etal. (1999) and Ames etal. (1999) 
estimated thatthe totalintake of 800 mg would be needed for bone accrual.Again,the 
assum ption thatanother approximately30percentisneeded to cover about 9 7.5percentof 
thepopulation-the R NIvalue forcalcium would be 1,000mg/day forthisagegroup. 
Most research inchildren regardingoptima lcalcium intakes has been directed toward 
9-to 18-year-olds-the efficiencyofcalciumabsorptionisincreased duringpuberty,and mos t 
bone mineralizationoccurs.Thisis theperiodofgrowth spurtsand theattainment of‘peak 
bone ma ss’.Achieving ahigherpeakbone mass isconsidered abetterapproach forprevention 
ofosteoporosis.
Datafrom studies on calciumbalanceinthisage-group have provided bone calcium 
accretion levelsforchildren and adolescents rangingfrom 92 to 210 m g/day (Vatanparast
etal.,2010).Average bone calcium accretionwas includedinthe factorialmethod,and the 
intake levelscanbe estimatedasranging betwe en 961-1116 m g/dayinfemales and 1200-1300 
mg/dayinmales.IOM (2011)interpolatedan estimatedm ean need forcalciumforboys and 
girlsof1,100mg/daywithrounding,a value approximatelyatthemidpointbetween thetwo 
groups.H ence,the RN Iis recommended tobe setat1300mg/daytocover97.5percentofthe 
populationaged 9 to18 yearsold. 
RN I forchildren & adolescents
1 -3 years 700 m g/day 
4 -6 years 1000 m g/day 
7 -9 years 1000 m g/day 
RN I foradolescents
10 -12 years 1,300 mg/day 
13 -16 years 1300 m g/day 
16 -19 years 1300 m g/day 
310 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
C alcium 
311 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
C alcium 
Adults 
After peak bone m assattainment,bone forma tionand resorption is balanced during 
adulthood.Bo ne m assdensityis relativelystablebetween ages 20-50,and hence there are 
relativelyfew interventionstudies on theroleofcalcium duringyoung and middle adulthood.
F AO /WH O (2002)recom mended 750mg/dayforpopulationswithanimalproteinintake 
of20-40g/day.IOM (2011)citedastudywh ich provides theonlyevidence forcalcium balance 
studiesatthislifestagegroups.Based on aseries ofcontrolledcalcium balance studies,they 
haveestablished an EA R calcium intake levelof741mg/day tomaintain neutralcalcium balance, 
w hichisrounded to800mg/day.H ence,IOM hassettheRNI forcalcium forthisage-group at 
1000mg/day.B asedon these considerations,theproposed RNI forcalciumforadultsaged 19 
to 50yearsinw omen and men is revisedto1000mg/day.
The naturalprocessofbone lossbeginstomanifestitselfintheolderagegroup.Itbegins 
earlierforwom en thanformen asa resultoftheonsetofmenopa use,which usuallyoccurs 
w hen wom en reach50to55yearsofage.By thetimeboth me n and wome n have reached 70 
or m ore yearsofage,theywillbe experiencingbone loss.Me nopause isalso associated with 
ariseinexcretionofobligatorycalcium or fastingurineofabout 20 mg-40-mg daily.
Wom en 51through70yearsofageareconsidered separately from me n.Althoughitis 
evidentthatcalciumintake does notpreventbone loss duringthe firstfew years ofmenop ause, 
thereisthequestionofwhetherortowhatextentcalcium intake canmitigatetheloss ofbone 
duringand imme diatelyfollowing the onsetofm enopause.Severalstudies includinga local 
study of milk supplementation among M alaysianpostmen opausalwom en with 1200 mg 
calciumper dayhasbeen shown toreduce rateofbone loss(Chee etal., 2003). 
Availablebalancedataindicate thattheEA R forwom en aged over51 is 1000m g/dayand 
800m g formen. (IOM, 2011).Therefore,the RNI forcalcium issetat1200m g/dayforwome n 
aged 51yearsand above and 1000mg forme n.
RNI foradults
20 -39 years 1000 m g 
40 -49 years 1000 m g
50-59 years 1200 m g (wom en);1000 mg (men) 
≥60 years 1200 m g (wom en);1000 mg (men) 
Pregnancy & Lactation 
The foetalneed forcalciumismet by maternalphysiologicalchanges,primarilythrough 
increased calcium absorption.There isstilla debatewhether thecalcium required forfoetal 
bone mineralization can be obtained with no detectable mo bilization of m aternal bone. 
Nevertheless,IOM (2011)reportedthattheEAR fornon-pregnantwome n and adolescentsis 
appropriateforpregnantw omen and adolescentsbased on the randomized controlledtrials 
(RCTs)ofcalciumsupplementation during pregnancythatrevealno evidence thatadditional 
calciumintakebeyond norm alnon-pregnantrequirementshas anybenefittomother orfoetus 
(Koo etal. 1999; Jarjou etal. 2010).H ence the RN Ifornon-lactatingpregnant wo m en and 
adolescentareat1000and 1300mg/day,respectively. 
Pos t-lactation m aternalbone m ineralisrestored w ithoutconsistentevidence thathigher 
calcium intakeisrequired,as based on two RCTs (Cross etal. 199 5;P rentice etal. 1995).There 
isno evidence thatcalcium intakeinlactatingwom en and adolescentsshouldbe increased 
above thatofnon-lactating women and no additionalamou ntw asprovided (IOM,2011).The 
calciumRNI for lactatingwom en issetat1000m g/dayand lactating adolescents at 1300 
mg/day. 
RN I forpregnancy & lactation 
13 -19 years 1300 mg/day
20 -49 years 1000 mg/day 
D iscussionson revised RNI forMalaysia 
The previous recommended dietaryintakesforcalcium (NCC FN, 2005)were lowerthan 
the current recom mended calcium intakefor Malaysianinfants,but higher foradolescents, 
youngeradults,pregnantandlactating mothers.Thisisin lightofreviseddatafrom IOM (2011) 
based on studieson calcium balanceacrossdifferentage-groups. 
17.8 Tolerableupper intakelevels
Calciumlevels in thebody areveryclosely controlledso thatexcessiveaccumulationin 
blood or tissues arising from over consumption is unknown . Abn orm ally high calcium 
concentrations m ay occur but usually secondary to diseases such as bone cancer, 
hyperthyroidismand hyperparathyroidism.The efficiencyofcalciumabsorptiondecreaseswith 
intake,thereby providingthebody w ithaprotectivemechanism tolessen thechances ofcalcium 
intoxication.
The com mon effectsofexcessivecalcium intakes arekidneystones(nephrolithiasis), 
milk-alkalisyndrome and interaction ofcalciumwithabsorption ofother essentialminerals 
such as iron,zinc,magnesium and phosphorous.Calcificationofvasculartissues hasbeen 
reported w ithhigh calcium intake however, the reportsare based on individuals with 
compr omised kidneyfunction.No linkhasbeen clearlyestablished fora generalpopulation. 
Similarly,thereisno conclusiveevidence thatthe intakeofcalciumperse intherangeof1000 
312 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
C alcium 
313 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
C alcium 
to 1200mg/day can be associatedwithcardiovascularevents(IOM,2011).IO M (2011)had 
establishedatolerable upper level(UL)accordingtoage groups.The calciumtolerableupper 
intakelevelsby lifestagesis shown inTable17.2. 
Table17.2:C alcium TolerableUpper IntakeLevelsby LifeStages 
LifeStageGroup UL (mg) 
Infants 
0-6m onths 1000 
6-12m onths 1500 
C hildren,adolescents& adults 
1-3years 2500 
4-8 years 2500 
9 -13years 3000 
14-18years 3000 
19-30years 2500 
31-50years 2500 
51-70years 2000 
>70years 2000 
Pregnancy & lactation 
14-18years 3000 
19-50years 2500 
Source:IOM (2011). 
17.9 Researchrecommendations 
The followingpriorityareasofresearch arerecommend ed:
1. N ationallyrepresentative dataon calciumintakes ofvariouspopulationgroups such as 
children,adolescents,adults and elderly. 
2. Contentofcalcium in localfoods and absorptionefficiency,especiallyfrom non-dairy 
foods. 
3. Studieson theeffectsofincreasedcalcium intakes on skeletalma ss and bone loss.In 
adolescents,itis impo rtantto determine to wh atextentincreasedcalcium intakecan 
influence peak bone mass formationin conjunction w ithother nutrientsand physical 
activity level.
4. Calcium balance studies on various age and ethnic groups to determine optimal 
recomm endations ofcalcium intake. 
314 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
C alcium 
17.10 References 
Abrams SA,GrusakM A,StuffJ,O’Brien KO (1999). Calciumand ma gnesium balance in9-14- 
y-oldchildren.Am J ClinNutr. 66:1172-1177. 
AllenL & Woods R (1994).Calcium and phosphorus.In: Shills,M. E.,Olson,J.and Shike,M. 
(eds.)M odern N utritioninH ealthand Disease,Lea& Fibiger,Philadelphia: 144-163 
Ames SK,EllisKJ,G unn SK,Copeland KC & Abrams SA (1999).Vitamin D receptorgene Fok 1 
polymor phism predictscalciumabsorption and bone mineraldensityin children.J Bone 
MinerRes 14(5):740-746. 
Atkinson SA,Alston-MillsBP ,LonnerdalB ,NevilleMC & Thomp son M P (1995).M ajorminerals 
and ionicconstituents ofhuman and bovinemilk.InH andbook ofMilkComp osition, 
Jensen R J (ed).SanDiego,CA: Academic P ress:593-619. 
Barrett-Connor,E, Chang JC & EdelsteinSL (1994).Coffee-associatedosteoporosisoffsetby 
daily milk consumption.The Rancho Bern ardo Study.J Am Med Assoc 271(4): 280- 
283. 
Ber gman EA ,M asseyLK,Wise KJ & SherrardDJ (1990).Effectsofdietary caffeine on renal 
handling ofmineralsin adultwomen. LifeSciences 47(6): 557-564 
Bo otm anMD, CollinsTJ,Pep piattCM, Pro theroLS,Mac-KenzieL,De Sm etP ,TraversM ,Tovey 
SC,Seo JT,B erridgeMJ, CiccoliniF &Lipp P (2001).Calcium signalling-Anoverview. 
Semin CellDev Biol 12:3-10. 
BronnerF (2009).Recent developmentsin intestinalcalciumabsorption.NutrRev 67:109-113 
Calvo,MS (1993).Dietaryphosphorus,calcium m etabolismandbone.J Nutr. 123(9):1627-1633 
CampbellAK (1990).Calcium asanintracellularregulator.Proc NutrSoc 49: 51-56 
Chantry CJ,AuingerP & By rdRS (2004).Lactationamong adolescentmothers andsubsequent 
bone m ineraldensity.Arch PediatrAdolescMed . 158(7): 650-656. 
Chee WS S,SuriahAR, Chan SP ,Zaitun Y & Chan YM (2003).The effects of m ilk 
suppleme ntationon bone mineraldensity of postmen opausalChinese wo men in 
Malaysia.Osteoporos Int, 14(10):828-833 
Chee W S,SuriahAR ,Zaitun Y,Chan SP ,YapSL & Chan YM (2002).Dietary calciumintake in 
postm enopausal Malaysian women: com parison between the food frequency 
questionnaireand three-dayfood records.AsiaPac J ClinN utr,11(2):pp.142-146. 
315 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
C alcium 
Chung M ,BalkEM, Brendel M ,Ip S,LauJ,Lee J,LichtensteinA,P atelK,Rama n G,TatsioniA, 
Terasawa T & TrikalinosTA (2009).VitaminD and Calcium:A SystematicReview of 
Health O utcomes. Ev idence R eportN o.183.(Preparedby the Tufts Evidence-based 
P racticeCenter under ContractN o.H HS A 290-2007-10055-I.)AHRQ P ublicationN o. 
09-E015.Rockville,MD : Agency forHealthcareRe search and Quality.
Christakos S (2012).R ecent advancesin our understanding of 1,25-dihydroxyvitaminD3 
regulationofintestinalcalcium absorption.Archives ofBiochemistry and Biophysics, 
523:73-76 
DarlingAL,M illw ardDJ,TorgersonDJ,He wittCE & Lanham-Ne w SA (2009).Dietary protein 
and bone health:asystematicreview and me ta-analysis.Am J ClinN utr. 90(6):1674- 
1692. 
Dew ey KG,FinleyDA & LonnerdalB (1984).B reastmilkvolume and compositionduringlate 
lactation (7-20months).J PediatrGastroenterolN utr. 3(5): 713-20. 
Esra T,ZalilahMS ,EsfehaniAJ,Chan YM & Fatemeh E .(2014).DietaryCalciumIntake and 
Socioeconom ic StatusAre Associated w ithBo ne M ineralDensityinP ostme nopausal 
Wom en.Wor ld AppliedSciencesJournal 31(2): 244-252. 
FA O /WH O (2002).Calcium.In: Human Vitamin and MineralR equiremen ts.Report ofa Joint 
F AO /WH O Expert Consultation.FAO ,R ome : 151-171.
G arth FE (2016).Calcium homeostasis. http://em edicine.m edscape.com/article/874690- 
overview (accessed10/3/17) 
H arris SS& Dawson -Hu ghes B (19 94).Caffeine and bone loss inhealthy postme nopausal 
w omen. Am J Clin Nutr. 60(4):573-578. 
H eaneyRP & Rafferty K (2001).Carbonatedbeveragesand urinarycalciumexcretion.Am J 
ClinNutr. 74(3):343-347. 
H eaney RP & Re cker RR (198 2).Effects of nitrogen,phosphorus,and caffeine on calcium 
balanceinw omen. J Lab ClinMed 99(1): 46-55 
H eaneyR P & Weaver CM (1990).Calcium absorptionfrom kale.Am J ClinNu tr51:656-657. 
H uncharekM, Muscat J,KupelnickB. (2008).Impact ofdairyproductsand dietarycalciumon 
bone-mineralcontentinchildren:resultsofameta-analysis.Bone 43:312-321. 
Institute forP ublic H ealth(IPH)(2014)NationalHe althand Mor biditySurvey 2014:Malaysian 
AdultNutrition Survey (MANS) Vol.II: Survey F indings: 343pp. 
IOM (1997).Calcium.In:Dietaryreferences forCalcium,Pho sphorus,Magn esium, Vitamin D 
and Fluoride. Food and N utrition Board,InstituteofMe dicine.NationalAcademy Pr ess, 
WashingtonDC;pp 71-145 
316 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
C alcium 
IOM (2011).Dietary Reference IntakesforCalcium and Vitamin D. Wash ington,DC : The 
NationalAcademies Press. 
JarjouLM, LaskeyMA, Sawo Y,Goldberg G R,ColeTJ & Prentice A (2010).Effectofcalcium 
supplementationinpregnancy on maternalbone outcomes inw om en w ithalow calcium 
intake.Am J Clin Nutr. 92(2):450-457. 
Kalkw arfH J (1999).H ormonalanddietaryregulation ofchanges inbone density duringlactation 
and afterw eaning inwomen. J Mam mary Gland BiolN eoplasia 4(3): 319-329. 
Kalkwarf H.J, Specker B L, B ianchiDC, R anz J & Ho M (199 7).The effect of calcium 
suppleme ntationon bone densityduringlactation and afterweaning.N Eng J Med 
337(8):523-528. 
Koo WW ,Walters JC,Esterlitz J,Levine RJ, Bush AJ & SibaiB (199 9 ).M aternalcalcium 
supplem entation and fetalbone m ineralization.O bst& G yne 94(4): 577-582.
Kovacs CS(2005).Calciumand bone m etabolismduring pregnancy and lactation.J M ammar y 
Gland BiolNeoplasia 10(2):105-118. 
Lee JK & KhirASM (2007).The incidenceofhipfractureinMalaysians above 50yearsofage: 
variation indifferentethnicgroups.APLA R J R heumatol ;10:300-305 
Lee CM, Sidhu JS& Pan KL (1993).Hip fracture incidence inM alaysia198 1-1989.ActaOrthop 
Scand 64(2):178-180 
Lee WT K,Leung SSF & LuiSSH (1993).Relationship oflong-term calcium intake and bone 
mineralcontentofchildren aged from birthto5years.BrJ N utr 70:235-248. 
Lee W TK & Leung SSF (1995).Effectsofdouble-blindcontrolledcalcium supplementationon 
calcium absorption in Chinese children m easured withstable isotopes.BrJ N utr 73:311- 
321. 
LonnerdalB (2010).Calcium and iron absorption—mechanisms and publichealthrelevance. 
IntJ Vitam NutrRes. 80(4-5):293-299 
Lynch SR (2000).The effectofcalcium on ironabsorption.N utrRes R ev 13:141-158 
Lynch MF ,GriffinIJ,Hawthorne KM, Chen Z,Hamz o M & Abrams SA (2007).Calciumbalance 
in1-4-y-oldchildren.Am J ClinNutr. 85(3):750-754 
McCor m ickCC (2002).Passive diffusiondoes notplayama jorroleintheabsorptionofdietary 
calciumin normaladults. J Nutr132:3428-3430 
Munr o P .(2010).Calcium in Health& disease.ClinJ Am Soc Nep hrol 5:S23-S30.
317 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
C alcium 
P oh BK ,N g B K.,SitiH aslinda MD, N ikShanitaS,W ong JE, B udinSB ,RuzitaAT.Ng LO,Khouw 
I& Norimah AK (2013)N utritionalstatus and dietaryintakes ofchildrenaged 6 m onths 
to 12 years:findings ofthe N utrition SurveyofMalaysianChildren (SEANU TSM alaysia). 
BrJ Nutr110(S3):S21-S35.
Pr entice AL ,Jarjou M, ColeTJ,StirlingDM, Dibba B & Fairwe ather-TaitS (1995).Calcium 
requirements oflactatingGambianmothers: effectsofacalcium supplement on breast- 
m ilkcalcium concentration, m aternalbone m ineralcontent,and urinarycalcium 
excretion.Am J Clin Nutr 62(1):58-67. 
SellmeyerDE, SchloetterM & SebastianA (2002).Potassium citrate prevents increased urine 
calcium excretion and bone resorptioninduced by ahighsodium chloridediet. J Clin 
Endo & Metab 87(5):2008-2012. 
Shapses SA & Sukumar D.(2010). P rotein intakeduring weight loss: effects on bone.In 
N utritionalAsp ects of Osteoporosis. Burckh ardtP ,Dawson-Hughes B & We averCM 
(eds).London: Springer.:9-16. 
SpeckerBL, V ieiraNE, O ’Brien KE, H o ML, Heubi JE, Abrams Sa& Yergey AL (1994).Calcium 
kineticsinlactatingwomen withlow and highcalciumintakes. Am J Clin N utr 59(3): 
593-599. 
SuriawatiAA,Abdul M ajidH ,NabillaAS,M ohd NaharAM & YazidJ.(2016). VitaminD and 
Calcium Intakes,Ph ysicalActivity,and Calcaneus BMC among School-Going 13-Year 
O ld MalaysianAdolescents.Nutrients 8: 666;doi:10.3390/nu8100666 
Tee E S,IsmailM N,M ohd NasirA & KhatijahI(199 7).Nu trientCo mp osition ofMa laysian Foods. 
4th Edition. Malaysian Food Composition Database Pr ogramme ,InstituteforMedical 
R esearch,KualaLumpur.
U usi-R asi1 K,KarkkainenMJ & ChristelJE. (2013).Calciumintake inhealthma intenance -a 
systematic review.Food & NutrRes 57:210-282 
V atanparast,H ,BaileyDA,Baxter-Jones AD & Whiting SJ (2010).Calcium requirements for 
bone growth inCanadianboys and girlsduringadolescence.BrJ N utr : 1-6. 
Weaver C,ProulxWR & Heaney R (1999).Choices forachievingadequate dietary calciumwith 
avegetariandiet.Am J ClinNutr. 70(suppl):543S-8S. 
W HO (1994). Assessment of Fracture Risk and Its A pplication to Screening for 
Postmen opausalOsteoporosis. TechnicalRep ortSeries 843.Wo rldHealth Organization, 
G eneva. 
318 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
C alcium 
M alaysia (20 17) 
A ge group RNI (m g/day) 
M alaysia (20 0 5) IOM (20 11) FA O/W H O (20 0 4) 
A ppendix 17.1 C om parison ofrecom m ended intake forcalcium :RNI M alaysia (20 17),RNI M alaysia (20 0 5),RNI ofIOM (20 11)and RNI of 
FA O/W H O (20 0 4) 
A ge group RNI (m g/day) A ge group RNI (m g/day) A ge group RNI (m g/day) 
Infants Infants Infants A I Infants 
0 -5m onths 200(B F ) 0 -5m onths 300 (B F ) 0 -6 m onths 200(B F ) 0 -6 m onths 300 (bf) 
250(F F ) 400 (F F ) 250 (F F ) 
6 -11 m onths 260 6 -11 m onths 400 6 -12 m onths 260 7 -11 m onths 400 (ff) 
C hildren C hildren C hildren C hildren 
1 -3 years 700 1 -3 years 500 1 -3 years 700 1 -3 years 500 
4 -6 years 1000 4 -6 years 600 4 -8 years 1000 4 -6 years 600 
7 -9 years 1000 7 -9 years 700 7 -9 years 700 
Boys Boys Boys Boys 
10 -12 years 1,300 10 -12 years 1,000 9 -18 years 1,300 10 -18 years 1,300 
13 -15years 1,300 13 -15years 1,000 
16 -18 years 1,300 16 -18 years 1,000 
G irls G irls G irls G irls 
10 -12 years 1,300 10 -12 years 1,000 9 -18 years 1,300 10 -18 years 1,300 
13 -15years 1,300 13 -15years 1,000 
16 -18 years 1,300 16 -18 years 1,000 
M en M en M en M en 
19 -29 years 1,000 19 -29 years 800 19 -50 years 1000 19 -65years 1,000 
30 -50 years 1,000 30 -50 years 1,000 > 65years 1,300 
51 -59 years 1,000 51 -59 years 1,000 51 -70 years 1,000 
60 -65years 1,000 60 -65years 1,000 > 70 years 1,000 
≥ 60 years 1,000 ≥ 60 years 1,000 
319 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
C alcium 
M alaysia (20 17) 
A ge group RNI (m g/day) 
M alaysia (20 0 5) IOM (20 11) FA O/W H O (20 0 4) 
A ge group RNI (m g/day) A ge group RNI (m g/day) A ge group RNI (m g/day) 
W om en W om en W om en W om en 
20 -39 years 1,000 19 -50 years 800 19 -50 years 1,000 19 -50 years 1,000 
40 -49 years 1,000 51 -65years 1,000 51 -65years 1,300 
50 -59 years 1,200 > 65years 1,000 51 -70 years 1,200 > 65years 1,300 
≥ 60 years 1,200 > 70 years 1,200 
Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy 
13 -19 years 1,300 
1st trim ester 1,000 1st trim ester 1,000 14 -18 years 1,300 1st trim ester 1,000 
2nd trim ester 1,000 2nd trim ester 1,000 19 -50 years 1000 2nd trim ester 1,000 
3rd trim ester 1,000 3rd trim ester 1,000 3rd trim ester 1,200 
Lactation Lactation Lactation Lactation 
13 -19 years 1,300 
0 -3 m onths 1,000 0 -3 m onths 1,000 14 -18 years 1,300 0 -3 m onths 1,000 
4 -6 m onths 1,000 4 -6 m onths 1,000 4 -6 m onths 1,000 
7 -12 m onths 1,000 7 -12 m onths 1,000 19 -50 years 1000 7 -12 m onths 1,000 
B F =breastfed F F =form ulafed 
320 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
18 • Iron 
18.1 Introduction 
Iron isachemicalelementwith symbol F e and atom icnum ber26.Itis am etalin the first 
transition series withanatomic mass of55.8.Itisby mass themos tcommon elemen ton E arth, 
forming much ofEarth’souterand inner core.Ironexistsinawide range ofoxidationstates, 
–2 to +6,w ith+2and +3forms being centralto the biologicalproperties of thism ineral. 
E lem entaliron occurs in meteoroids and other low oxygen environm ents,butisreactive to 
oxygen and w ater.Fresh ironsurfacesappearlustroussilvery-gray,butoxidizeinnormalairto 
givehydrated ironoxides,comm onlyknown asrust.
18.2 Functions
Inhuma ns,iron represents approximately35and 45mg /kg ofbody we ightinadult 
wom en and m en,respectively.Accordingto IOM (2001),functionallyimportantforms ofiron 
inthe body existinfour m ajor classes.These includesfirstlyiron containing heme proteins 
such as haemog lobin,m yoglobin and cytochromes which isimportantforoxygen transport 
and storage as wellas electron transport.Secondly,iron sulphurenzym es thatisinvolved 
primarilyinenergymetabolism (flavoproteins,heme-flavoproteins).Thirdly,ironstorageand 
transportproteinsparticipating in iron uptake,transport and storage in the body such as 
transferrin,lactoferrin,ferritinand hemo siderin.Lastly,other iron-containing or activated 
enzym es such assulphur and nonheme enzymes. 
Iron alsoplaysimportantroles in cellularprocesses such asthesynthesisofDNA, RNA 
and proteins;electron transport;cellularrespiration;cellproliferationand differentiation;and 
regulationofgene expression.Itplays acrucialrolein maintainingcellulariron home ostasisby 
regulating gene expression atthe post-transcriptionallevel.Iron hom eostasis is criticalfor 
norm albrainfunction,especially inlearningand memory. 
18.3 Metabolism 
The body hasno m echanism fortheexcretion ofiron,and itis argued thatthe acquisition 
and distributionofiron istightly regulated,in orderto avoid excessive accumulation ofthe 
element.Thiscontrolofbody irondepends on aneffectiveco-ordination ofintestinaluptake and 
transferofiron,withtherecycling ofiron from thered blood cellma ss and othertissues,the 
storageand releaseofironfrom theliver,and integum ental(i.e.lossfrom theepidermis and 
epithelia)and,inwom en,menstruallosses.At thefunctionallevel,thecellsinvolved arethe 
enterocytes,hepatocytesand macrophages ofthe reticulo-endothelialsystem (RES) (i.e.the 
monocyte-m acrophagesystem).Inmacrophages,theuptakeand exportofironismediatedby 
DivalentM etalTransporter1 (DMT1 )andferroportin,respectively,and aswithenterocytes these 
processes areregulated by hepcidin(Ganz,2013).A schematic diagram ofwhole-body iron 
metabolismisshow n inFigure18.1. 
321 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Iron 
Figure 18.1: Whole-bodyironmetabolism.RE, reticuloendothelial
Source: EFS A,(2015) 
Iron absorption occursm ainly in theduoden um andproximalsmallintestine.Ab sorption 
involvesthe uptakeof iron from the intestinallum en into enterocytes,its transferwithin 
enterocytes anditssubsequenttranslocationacross thebasolateralmembr anetocarriers inthe 
plasma of the portalcirculation (EFS A 2015).Iron absorption isregulated by both dietary 
regulatorandstoreregulator.Dietaryregulatorregulate short-termincreasein dietaryironwhile 
storesregulator regulateironstoragein theliver. 
About1-2 mg ofiron islosteveryday,throughskin andentericdesquamationand minor 
blood losses.This loss is balanced by intestinalabsorption.Mos toftheiron inthe body is 
recycled wh en oldred blood cellsare taken outofcirculation and destroyed,withtheiriron 
scavengedby macrophagesin themononuclearphagocytesystem, mainlyspleen,andreturned 
to thestoragepoolforre-use.Ironhom eostasisiscloselyregulatedviaintestinalabsorption. 
Increased absorption is signalledviadecreased hepcidinby decreasingironstores,hypoxia, 
inflam ma tion,and erythropoieticactivity.The situation is differentinmen struatingwomen, 
pregnantw omen, duringinfancyand childhood where increased irondema nd occurs due to 
highblood lossor growthand developmentdem ands. 
Red celldestructionn Re d cellproduction 
1-2mg absorbed 1-2mg obligatory loss 
Erythrocytes
2500m g 
Plasma 
4m g 
Body stores 
1000mg 
My oglobin& 
respiratory 
enzym es
300mg 
RE system 25m g/day Bone marrow
322 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Iron 
The availability ofironforabsorptioninthe duodenum and smallintestineisaffectedby 
anumber ofdietary constituents,which actaseitherinhibitors(e.g.phytate,polyphenolsand 
calcium)or enhancers(e.g.ascorbicacid and animaltissue).The mec hanismofactionisthe 
formationofironcomplexesin thedigestivechyme inthegutlumen,and the strengthofbinding 
dictates w hether or not the iron can be removed from the comp lexby DM T1.In addition, 
ascorbicacidreduces ferric(Fe3+)irontoferrous(Fe2+),w hichisthechemicalform thatis 
takenup by DMT1 (EFSA, 2015).
Calcium(Ca)istheonlymicronutrientin the dietthatma y inhibitboth haeme and non- 
haeme iron absorption,but themechanisms areunclearand the effectappearsto be short- 
term. There isan adaptation toahighintakeofCa asregulatoryme chanism ofFe absorption 
to maintainFe homeost asis(M irandaet al., 2014).As forironand zinc interaction,m any 
comb ined iron-zinc supplemen tation trials inhumans,have reportedvaried efficacy (Lind etal., 
2003;Wieringa etal.,2007),implying possiblenegativeinteractions.A review ofpublished 
studies on the effectsofzincon iron absorptionconcluded thatthe inhibitoryeffectofzinc 
occursataZn-Fe (weight/weight)ratio of1:1inaqueoussolutionsbut,importantly,thereis no 
inhibitory effect in food m atrices(Olivareset al., 2012).Interactions of copper-ironare 
influenced by age and stage of development (Collinset al., 2010),especiallyprenatal 
developm ent (Gam bling et al., 2008).In additionto the well-understood effects of copper 
deficiency on iron m etabolism(leading to anaemia),thereissome evidence suggesting that 
copper deficiencyresults inlower liver ironconcentration,and delivery ofiron (asw ellas 
copper)to thefoetusm aybe compromised (Andersen etal., 2007). 
Vitamins such as V itamin A can affect severalstages of iron m etabolism,including 
erythropoiesisand the release of ironfrom ferritinstores.A num ber of trialshave been 
undertakentoexamine theeffectofvitamin A supplementation/fortificationon indices ofiron 
status(M ichelazzo etal., 2013),and many reportanimpactofvitaminA on haem oglobinand 
otherparameters.Studies examiningtheeffectofvitaminA on iron absorptionhave produced 
conflictingfindings and itisnotclearw hethervitaminA and/oriron status are key determinants 
ofaneffect(Hurrelland Egli,2010).
Ove rall,EFS A (2015) considersthatinteractions between ironand other minerals, 
vitaminsand certain dietaryconstituents,in the contextof a m ixedEu ropean diet,are not 
relevantforsettingDietaryR eferenceValue(DR Vs) foriron. 
18.4 Sources
There aretwo types ofiron infoods -haem ironandnon-haem iron.Ha em ironis derived 
primarilyfrom thehaemoglobinand myoglobin offleshfoodssuch as mea ts,fish,and poultry. 
Abo ut 40 percentofiron from m eat,fish,and poultry isinthe haem form wh ilethe restis 
nonhaem iron.No n-haem iron isfound inplantfoods such as breads,cereals,dark leafy 
vegetables (such asspinach,fern shoots,kangkung),legumes and eggs.Ex amples offood 
sourcesofironaregiven inTable 18.1. 
323 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Iron 
Table18.1:Iron contentoffoods. 
Food m g/100 g edible portion 
Legumes and legum es products 
Chickpea 6.9 
F riedsoyabean curd 7.3 
Vegetables 
F ern Shoots(pucuk paku) 4.8 
B ittergourd 6.1 
Spinach(bayam pasir) 5.0 
Kangkung 5.2 
Fruits 
Kedondong 3.4 
Jackfruit(nangka) 1.1 
Ram butan 2.5 
M eat 
Leanbeefmeat 2.2 
Liver,ox 9.0 
Chicken 2.8 
E gg 2.4 
Fish 
Driedikanbilis,w hole 5.3 
B oiledcockles 7.9 
Tenggiri(Spanishmackeral) 1.1 
C erealsand cerealproducts 
Kuih-teow 3.4 
B iscuit,w holemealcrackers 4.3 
B read,wholem eal 3.2 
Source:Tee etal. (1997) and M yFCD (2016). 
324 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Iron 
18.5 Deficiency 
Iron deficiency is aseriousproblem worldwide.Itoccursfollowingprolonged negative 
iron balance,the major causes of which includeinadequate intake (owing to insufficient 
bioavailableiron inthe dietor decreasedironabsorption),increasedironrequirem ents (for 
instance,during periods ofgrowth)and chronicbloodloss(from heavyhookworm infection or 
menstrualbleeding).Irondeficiencycan be found invariousdegree from low ironstores;to 
earlyiron deficiency toiron-deficiency anaemia(Figure18.2).These biochem icalme asuresare 
used asthekey indicatorsinsettingtheiron requirements.
Low iron stores 
• Low serum ferritin 
• Decrease iniron-bindingcapacity 
Earlyirondeficiency 
• Decreased serum transferrinsaturation 
• Increasederythrocyteprotoporphyrin
concentration 
Irondeficiencyanem ia 
• Low hem oglobinand hemat ocrit 
• Reduced mean corpuscularhem oglobinand
volume 
Figure 18.2: Stagesofirondeficiency(adaptedfrom WHO, 2007) 
Clinicalfeaturesofiron deficiencyinclude koilonychia(spoon-shaped nails),softnails, 
glossitis,cheilitis (dermatitis atthe corner ofthe mo uth),m ood changes,mus cle we akness 
and impaired immunit y.How ever,thesefeaturesarenotspecificto iron deficiencybutma y also 
be manifestationofothernutritionaldeficiencies.
The pathogenesisof irondeficiency ma y not be dietary.No n-dietarycauses ofiron 
deficiency and anaem ia include conditions thatcause gastrointestinal blood loss or 
malabsorption,e.g.cancerand inflamm atorybowel disease,intestinalinfections and parasitism. 
Blood loss from the genito-urinaryand respiratorytractsmay also contribute toiron deficiency 
(Steketee,2003).Importantsubclinicalandclinicalconsequences ofiron deficiencyare impaired 
physicalwork performance,developme ntaldelay,cognitiveimpairment,andadversepregnancy 
outcomes (IOM,2001).The bulk of experiment aland epidem iologicalevidence inhum ans 
suggeststhatfunctionalconsequences ofiron deficiency(related both toanaemiaand tissue 
iron concen tration) occur only whe n irondeficiencyisof a severity sufficient to cause a 
measurabledecreasein haemoglobin concentration.
325 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Iron 
Iron deficiency is linked toreduced capacityforphysicalactivity,reduced productivityand 
increased fatigue leadingtopoorercognitive work performance (Patterson and Blumfeild,2009; 
G reiget al., 2013).The economi c costs of iron deficiency anaem iafrom annualphysical 
productivity losseshavebeen calculatedtobe around US$ 2.32percapita,or 0.57%ofgross 
dom esticproductin low- and middle-income countries(W H O,2016).Ev idencealsosuggests 
thatirondeficiencymay be associated withadverse neurodevelopmentaloutcomes inyoung 
children (Bakerand G reer,2010).F urthermo re,intheabsence oftreatment,irondeficiency may 
progress to iron deficiencyanaemia,which has been found tobe associated w ithirreversible 
developmentaldelayinyoung children (Lozoffetal., 2006).Iron deficiency anaem ia during 
pregnancy haslongbeen associatedw ith anincreased risk oflow birthwe ight,preterm delivery, 
perinatalm ortality,and infantand young childmortalityas w ellas maternalmortality(Allen, 
2000).
For the year2011,itis estimatedthatroughly43% ofchildren,38% pregnantw omen, 
29% non-pregnantwomen and 29% ofallw omen ofreproductive age have anaemiaglobally, 
corresponding to 273 million children,496 million non-pregnant wo men and 32 m illion 
pregnantw ome n (WH O,2015).WHO suggested theclassificationofpublichealthsignificance 
of anaemiain populations on the basis of prevalence estimated from blood levels of 
haem oglobin,nam ely 4.9% or lower as “norm al”,5.0-19.9% as “m ild,”20.0-39.9% as 
“moder ate”and ≥ 40% as“high” (WH O ,2011) 
In Malaysia,iron deficiency anaemiaw astheleadingcause ofyears lived w ith disability 
(YLDs) amon g children and adolescents in 2013 (GlobalBu rden of Disease Ped iatrics 
Collaboration,2016).The prevalence ofchildrenand adolescents withiron deficiency anaemia 
in Malaysiaw as 16.2% (GlobalB urden of DiseasePed iatricsCollaboration,2016).Iron 
deficiency anaemia among aboriginalschoolchildren inruralPe ninsularMalaysia aged 7-12 
years was even higher (34%)(Al-Mekhlafietal., 2008).AccordingtotheNationalHea lthand 
Mo rbiditySurvey(NH MS )2015study,theoverallprevalence ofanaem iain Malaysiaw as24.6% 
am ong populationaged 15yearsand above (IPH, 2015).Pr evalenceofmild,moder ate,and 
severeanaemiausinghaemo globinlevelinTable18.2w ere15.7%,7.9 % and1.0% respectively. 
By gender,the prevalence of anaem iawas significantly higheramong females;35.5%than 
m ales;14.3% withIndians having the highestprevalence ofanaemia at30.8%, followed by 
M alaysat25.9%and lastlyChinese at23.0%.
Table18.2:Haem oglobinlevelstodiagnose anaemia atsea level 
Population Non Anaemi a* 
Anaem ia* 
Mild M oderate Severe 
N on-pregnantw omen 120or higher 110-119 80 -109 lowerthan80 
(15yearsofageand above) 
Pr egnantWomen 110or higher 100-109 70-99 lowerthan70 
M en (15yearsofage 130or higher 110-109 80 -109 lowerthan80 
and above) 
*H aemoglobining/L 
Source:WHO, 2001 
326 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Iron 
A study done by Loh and Khor(2010)found thatabout10.3%ofthew ome n show ed iron 
deficiencyanaemia(IDA)(H b <12g/dL +serum ferritin< 15(g/L+MC V <80fl/)withtheIndians 
show ingthe highestprevalence (18.0%)followed by Chinese (9.9%) and Malays (4.3% ). 
Am ong pregnantwo m en inMalaysia,38% have anaemiaaccording tothe WHO survey (M cLean 
etal., 2009).A nationwide,cross-sectionalstudy ofmore than1000pregnantw omen, 20-30 
yearsofage,found thattheprevalenceofanaemiaincreasedwithincreasing gestationalage, 
being12% inthe first,32% in thesecond and 43% in thethird trime ster(Haniffetal., 2007). 
Amo ng the olderpopulation,the prevalence ofiron deficiencyanaemiaam ong postmenopausal 
wom en was 3% (Am biyyaetal., 2014).
18.6 Factorsaffectingiron requirement 
The body iron storesregulatorplaysan importantpartinregulatingironabsorptionin 
accordancewith the body’sneeds,increasingabsorptionw hen stores arelow and decreasing 
when they arehigh.Duringthe development ofa negative iron balance (when absorption is 
smaller than losses),ironstores are firstdepleted (serum ferritin is lowered),which is 
successivelyassociated with acontinuous increaseindietaryiron absorption.Wh en iron stores 
aredepletedtherewillbe aconcomitantreductionintheconcentrationofHb. Thisreductionis 
alsoassociatedw ithanincreaseiniron absorption(Hallberg& Hulthen,2000). 
Dietary haem iron is betterabsorbed because haem is soluble atthepH ofthesmall 
intestine.For example,the averageabsorption ofhaem iron from me at-containing m ealsis 
about25percent.Haem ironuptakeby absorptiveenterocytes is notinfluenced by thedietary 
constituents thatadversely affectthe absorption ofinorganiciron.How ever,haem iron canbe 
degraded andconvertedto non-haemironiffoods arecooked atahigh tem peraturefortoo long. 
Non-haem ironcompound used forthefortificationoffoodswillonlybe partiallyavailablefor 
absorption.Once ironis dissolved,itsabsorptionfrom fortificantsand food contaminantsis 
influencedby thesame factorsastheiron nativetothefood substance. 
Severaldietary factorshavebeen identified which positivelyornegativelyinfluenced the 
absorptionofthedietaryiron.The absorptionofnonhaem ironfrom amea ldepends upon the 
neteffectoffactorsenhancing iron absorption (ascorbicacidandorganicacids;meat,chicken, 
fish and otherseafood;ferm entedvegetables,fermentedsoy sauces)and factorsinhibiting iron 
absorption(phytates and inositolphosphates;iron-bindingpolyphenols;calcium;soy proteins 
and vegetableproteins)(WHO /FAO,2004).(Table18.3) 
327 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Iron 
Table18.3: Factorsinfluencingdietaryironabsorption 
Haem iron absorption 
Amount ofdietary haem iron,especially from me at 
Contentofcalciuminmeal (e.g.from milk,cheese) 
Food preparation(i.e.time, temperature) 
Non-haem ironabsorption 
Amo unt of potentiallyavailable non-haem iron (includes adjustmen t for fortificationironand 
contaminationiron) 
Balancebetween the following enhancingand inhibitingfactors: 
Enhancing factors: 
Ascorbicacid(e.g.certainfruitjuices,fruits,potatoes,and certainvegetables) 
Meat,fishand otherseafood 
Ferm ented vegetables(e.g.sauerkraut),fermented soy sauces,etc. 
Inhibiting factors: 
Phy tateand otherlow erinositolphosphates(e.g.bran products,breadma de from high-extraction 
flour,breakfastcereals,oats,rice -especiallyunpolished rice 
-pastaproducts,cocoa,nuts,soyabeans,and peas) 
Iron-bindingphenolic compounds (e.g.tea,coffee,cocoa,certainspices,certainvegetables,and 
most red w ines) 
Calcium(e.g.from m ilk,cheese) 
Soya 
Source:WHO/FA O (2004) 
328 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Iron 
The bioavailability ofiron inwestern-typedietis14 to16% inborderlineiron deficient 
subjects(Ha llberg & R ossander-Hul then,1991).Dietsthatcontainsm allerportions ofm eat 
and fish,high phytatesand som e vegetarian meals each week was found to have iron 
bioavailabilityof 12%. Reducing the meat and fish intake further willreduce the iron 
bioavailabilitytoabout10%.Intheabsenceofm eatand fishand w ithahighintakeofphytate, 
polyphenolsand vitaminC,thebioavailabilityofironisabout5%.Table18.4shows examples 
ofdiets w ithdifferentironbioavailability.Common Malaysiandiets have iron bioavailabilityof 
about4 to12% (Ism ailetal., 2001).
The am ountofdietaryiron absorbed ismainlydetermined by the am ountofbod y stores 
ofiron and by thepropertiesofthe diet(ironcontentand bioavailability).The absorptionof 
haem iron variesfrom about40percentduringirondeficiency toabout 10percentduringiron 
repletion(Hallberg,Hul then& Gramatkovski,1997).On theotherhand,theabsorptionofnon- 
haem iron differsdepending on the presence ofotherdietary compone ntsand physiological 
conditions.Itisimportant then to adjustabsorbed iron requireme ntsaccording to different 
typesofdiets especiallyin vulnerablegroups.
Table 18.4: Exam plesofdietwithdifferentironbioavailability 
Type ofdiet Bioavailability 
mg/ kg/day 
V eryhighmeat intwo m ainmealsdailyand highascorbicacid(theoretical) 75.0 
H ighmeat/fishintwo main m ealsdaily 66.7 
M oderatemeat/fishintwo main m ealsdaily 53.2 
M oderatemeat/fishintwo main m ealsdaily;low phytateand calcium 42.3 
M eat/fishin60% oftwo m ainmealsdaily;highphytateand calcium 31.4 
Low meat intake;highphytate;often one main m eal 25.0 
M eat/fishnegligible;highphytate;hightanninand low ascorbicacid 15.0 
P re-agriculturalancestors 
P lant/animalsubsistence:65/35;veryhighmeat and ascorbicacidintake 150 
Source: WHO/F AO (2004) 
The W H O and theFAO proposed dietaryironbioavailabilityvaluesforsettingDRVs of 
15%,10% or5%depending on thecompositionofthediet,buttheevidence base from which 
thesevaluesw ereobtainedwas notprovided.The highestbioavailabilityvalueisfordiversified 
dietswith generous amo unts of meat and/orfoods richin ascorbic acid. The lowes t 
bioavailabilityisfordietsbasedon cereals,tubersandlegumes withlittleorno me atorascorbic 
acid-containingfruits and vegetables (Allen et al., 2006).Table 18.5shows dataof iron 
absorptioninw omen of55kg body weightwithno ironstores. 
329 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Iron 
Table 18.5: Translation of bioavailabilityexpressed as am ount of iron absorbed into percent 
absorbed fortwo levelsofiron intake 
Bioavailability, 
m g/kg/day 
Absorption as mg Feat 
no iron storesinw omen 
of55 kg body w eight 
Bioavailability % 
15 mg 17 m g 
150 8.25 55.0 48.8 
75 4.13 27.5 24.4 
66.7 3.67 24.5 21.8 
53.2 2.93 19.5 17 
42.3 2.32 15.5 13.5 
31.4 1.73 11.5 10 
25 1.38 9.2 8.2 
15 0.83 5.5 4.7 
Source: WHO/F AO (2004) 
18.7 Setting requirementsand recom mended intakeofiron
The recom mended nutrientintake(RN I)forironinMalaysiaisbased on theWHO/FA O 
(2004)recom m endations.The variousphysiologicalrequireme nts(basaliron losses,ironfor 
growth and me nstrualironlosses)suggested were considered insetting the requirements 
(Table 18.6).B eside the physiologicalrequirements,the amo unt of iron in food and its 
bioavailabilityin different diets w ere also taken into consideration.Taking into consideration 
availablelocalreportson ironintakeofcommunitiessuch asMalaysianAdultNutritionSurvey 
(MANS) (IPH,2014)and the ma gnitude ofiron deficiency problem inthe country,10% and 
15%iron bioavailability levelsofWHO/ FA O (2004)were adopted.
330 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Iron 
Table 18.6: Ironintakes requiredforgrowth,median basaliron,menstruallosses inwomen and 
totalabsolute ironrequirements
Age/S ex G rowth needs 
mg/day 
Basalloss 
mg/day 
Menstruation 
mg/day 
A bsorbed iron 
required, 
mg/day (95 th 
percentile) 
Infantsand children 
0.5-1 years 0.55 0.17 - 0.93 
1 -3 years 0.27 0.19 - 0.58 
4 -6 years 0.23 0.27 - 0.63 
7 -10years 0.32 0.39 - 0.89 
Males 
11 -14 years 0.55 0.62 - 1.46 
15-17 years 0.60 0.90 - 1.88 
18+years - 1.05 - 1.37 
Females 
11 -14 years* 0.55 0.65 - 1.40 
11 -14 years 0.55 0.65 0.48 3.27 
15-17 years 0.35 0.79 0.48 3.10 
18+years - 0.87 0.48 2.94 
Postmenopausal - 0.87 1.13 
Lactating - 1.15 1.50 
The R NIs for iron for Malaysiaaregiveninbold inthefollowingparagraphs according 
toagegroups and summarised inAppendix 18.1. 
Infants (0-5 m onths) 
Infants ages0-5months haveaconsiderableendowme ntofiron (80 mg/kg)from the 
mother and possess ahighhaemoglobin concentration.Ironrequireme ntsduringthefirst4-6 
months oflife offull-term infantscanbe met by ironprovidedthrough breastmilkasthetotal 
body ironofinfants atbirth and 4 m onths ofage rem ainessentially the same.Infants born 
prem aturelyorwithlow birthweightshouldreceiveadditionalironfrom otherdietarysources 
aftertwo m onthsfrom birth.
Thus,for0-5mon ths oldinfants,there willbe no recomm ended iron intakes asneonatal 
stores are adequate tomeet ironrequirement duringthisageperiod,and breastfeedingisfully 
encouraged(WHO/ FAO, 2004) 
* Non-m enstruating 
Source: WHO/F AO (2004) 
331 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Iron 
Infants (6-11 m onths) 
Infants aged 6-11m onthshavean increase inbody ironneed due toincrease inbasal 
iron losses,growthand thedecreaseiniron storefrom birth.Inadditiontobreastmilk,iron 
needs mu stbe me tfrom foods.Totaliron requireme ntsiscalculated by takinginto consideration 
basaliron losses(about0.17mg/day)and iron required for growth(0.55mg/day)which lead 
to totaliron required of0.93 mg /day(95 th percentile)(W HO/FA O,2004).Duringthisperiod, 
the infantshouldbe introducedtocompleme ntary foods.
% Bioavailability 
10 15 
RNI forinfants,m g/day 
6 -11 m onths 96
Children 
The me anincrease ofw eightfrom age2 tillonsetofpuberty isaveraged 2.5-2.75kg/year 
(Bothwelletal., 1979) which is equivalenttoiron requirement forgrowthof0.3mg/day.Basal 
iron lossesrange from 0.2to0.4mg/day.The totalironrequired (95thpercentile)fortheage 
ranges 1-3,4-6and 7-9 yearsoldare0.58 mg /day,0.63m g/dayand0.89m g/day,respectively. 
Itisassumed thatchildren by thesecond halfoftheirsecond yearoflifewould have started to 
eatwith the families.
% Bioavailability 
10 15 
RNI forchildren,mg/ day 
1 -3 years 64
4 -6 years 64
7 -9 years 96
Adolescents 
The m ajor physiologicaleventoccurring inthisage group ispuberty.The associated 
physiologicalprocesses thathave ma jorimpactson ironrequireme ntsaregrowth spurtin both 
sexes,menarche ingirlsand m ajorincreasesinhaemoglobin concentrations inboys.Due to 
differences inrequirements,therecommenda tionsarespecifiedseparatelyforboys and girls. 
Atlow bioavailability levelsof5% and 10%,iron needs (especiallyforfemaleadolescent) 
are exceedinglyhigh and would be difficultto be m et by the usualplant-baseddietsof 
M alaysians.Thus,itisimportantthatdietaryadviceon choice of diets be mad e or iron 
supplementationbe recommended. 
332 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Iron 
% Bioavailability 
10 15 
RN I adolescents,mg/ day
Boys 10 -14 years 15 10 
15 -18 years 19 12 
Girls10 -14 years* 14 9
10 -14 years 33 22 
15 -18 years 31 21 
*non-menstruating 
Adults 
Inmen and m enopausewomen, basalironlossistheonly compone ntused toestimate 
totalneeds for absorbed iron,which amounts to about 1.37 mg /day and 1.13 m g/day 
respectively(95 th percentile).For menstruatingwom en,theneeds derived from basalironloss 
(0.87 mg/day)and me nstrualloss (1.90mg/day)giving a totalrequirementof2.94 m g/day 
(95 th percentile).B ased on the habitualdiets ofMalaysianadult,itis difficultforamenstruating 
wom antoachievethe RNI for5% bioavailability. 
% Bioavailability 
10 15 
RN I adults,mg/da y
Men 19 yearsand above 14 9
Women 19 yearsand above 
Prem enopause 29 20 
Postmenopause 11 8
Pregnancy 
The com ponents used to estimate requireme ntforabsorbed ironinclude basallosses, 
iron deposited in foetusandrelated tissues,and iron utilizedinexpansionofhaemoglobinmass. 
Iron requirementsw erereported tobe 300mg forthe foetus,50mg fortheplacenta,450mg 
fortheexpansionofm aternalred cellmass and 240mg forbasalironlosses,totallingto1040 
mg (Table18.7).Net iron requirement inpregnancywas considered tobe 840mg, assuming 
sufficientironstores (i.e.storesof500m g availableduringthelasttwo trimesters).Totaldaily 
iron requirements w erenoted to increase during pregnancy from 0.8 mg toabout10mg during 
333 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Iron 
the lastsixw eeks,and iron absorptionwas reported to increase during pregnancy.The 
FA O /WH O (2004)didnotmake anyrecomm endationfor ironduringpregnancy asiron needs 
increasetremendously and generally beyond thatcanbe adequatelysuppliedby diets.Instead, 
iron supplemen tation(about100mg) isrecomm ended forpregnantwomen.
Table18.7:Iron requirementsduring pregnancy
Ironrequirements(mg) 
Iron requirementsduring pregnancy 
F oetus 300 
P lacenta 50 
E xpansionofmaternalerythrocytem ass 450 
B asaliron losses 240 
Totaliron requirement1040 1040 
Net iron balance afterdelivery 
Contractionofmaternalerythrocyte mass +450 +450 
M aternalblood loss-250 -250 
Net iron balance +200 +200 
Net iron requirementsforpregnancy a 840 840 
a Assuming sufficientm aterialironstoresarepresent. 
Source: WHO/F AO, 2004 
Lactation 
For lactatingw omen, iron issecreted inbreastmilk.Adding thisvalueof0.3mg/day to 
the basalloss of0.87m g/day,itisestimated thattheiron requireme ntsforlactatingw omen to 
be about1.1m g/d(WH O/FAO ,2004).The M alaysianRNI alsoassumes thatmens truationmay 
resume after6 months ofexclusivebreastfeeding.Thus,lactatingw ome n w ith mens truation 
m ayhaveahigheriron requirement.
% Bioavailability 
10 15 
RNI forlactation,mg/day
0 - 3 m onths 15 10 
4 - 6 m onths 15 10 
7 -12 m onths 15 10 
7 -12 m onths* 32 21 
* For lactatingw omen withmenstruation 
334 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Iron 
D iscussionson revised RNI forMalaysia 
The revised R NIforMalaysiaforiron retainedthe 10% and 15%bioavailabilitylevelsof 
RN I(2005)based on theconsiderations explainedinWHO/ FA O (2004).Itisbelieved that,the 
10% w ould cover for population taking lower bioavailability and 15% bioavailability 
approximatestheusuallevelofiron intakeamong Malaysianpopulationasshown by MANS 
2014study.
18.8 Tolerable upper intakelevels 
The riskof systemic iron overload from dietary sources is negligible with normal 
intestinalfunction.H ow ever,iron inexcess may leadto healthproblems due to its ability to 
generate reactiveoxygen speciesviathe Fenton reaction(M cCord,2004).The neteffectsare 
DNA dam age,impaired synthesis ofproteins,mem branelipids and carbohydrates,induction of 
proteases and altered cellproliferation.E xcess free ironcanreactdirectlyw ithunsaturated fatty 
acidsand inducelipidhydroperoxidasestoform alkoxyland/orperoxylradicalswhich in turn, 
impairseverelycellularintegrityleadingtocelldeath.Thisdestructive potentialofironhas led 
to the suggestion that excess iron m ightplay a role in the m ulti-stepprocesses of 
carcinogenesis,pathogenesis of atherosclerosisand other lifestyle diseases(Siddique & 
Kow dley,2012)aswellasneurodegenerativedisorderssuch asParkinson’sor Alzheimer’s 
diseases(Xieetal., 2014).
Acute large intakesof iron(e.g.20 mg or m ore elemen taliron/kg body weight), 
particularlywithoutfood,cause corrosivehaemorrhagicnecrosis of the intestinalmucosa, 
leadingto loosestools and blood loss,hypovolaemicshock,dam aging failure ofsystem ic 
organsand death.Earlyclinicalphenom enaofthis damage (gastritis,nausea,abdominalpain 
and vom iting)havebeen used tosetexposurelevelsforhealth guidance (EF SA 2015).Chronic 
ironoverloadmay occurin individualsaffectedby haem olytic anaemias,haem oglobinopathies 
orone ofthe haem ochromatosesand resultsin increasingsequestrationofiron in ferritinand 
haemo siderinin alltissues throughoutthe body. Eventu ally,the haem osiderindegrades 
releasingiron,wh ich in turncauses oxidativearchitecturaland functionaltissuedamage 
resultingincardiomyopathy,arthropathies,diabetesmellitusand neurologicaldisease.There 
isno evidence thatheterozygotesfor haemochromatoses areatan increased risk of iron 
overloadcom paredwiththerestofthe population(EFSA, 2015). 
Gastrointestinalsideeffectswe re selected asthe criticaladverse effectson w hichto 
base the UL for iron. Although gastrointestinaldistress isnot a serious side effect w hen 
compared withpossibleriskforvasculardiseaseand cancer,theotherside effectsconsidered 
did notpermitthedetermination ofU L (IOM,2001).Accordingto N utrientR eference Values for 
AustraliaandNew Zealand (NHMRC, 2005),forinfantsand young children,anuncertainty factor 
(UF) of3was used to extrapolatefrom thelowestobserved adverse effectlevel(LOAEL) tothe 
no observed adverseeffectlevel(N OA EL) basedon potentialadversegrowth effects(Dewe y et 
al., 2002),givingafigureof20m g/day.H owever,accordingtoIOM 2001,theme dianintake of 
iron forinfants,aged 11 to 14 m onths,isapproximately10 m g/day.Thus,the above data 
suggestthatan intakeof40 mg/day would be a NOAEL forinfants and young children.The 
NO AEL of40m g/daywas dividedby aUF of1,resultinginaUL of40mg/day ofsupplemental 
non-haem ironforinfantsandyoung children.Because thesafetyofexcess supplem entalnon- 
335 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Iron 
haem ironinchildren aged 4 through 18 years has not been studied,a UL of40 mg/day is 
recom m ended forchildren 4 through 13 years ofage.The upper tolerablelevelissetat45 
mg /dayforadolescentsand adults(includingpregnantand lactating wom en)basedon aLOAEL 
for gastrointestinalside effectsobserved in Swed ish adults following supplementation w ith 
ferrous fumarate(60mg/day)in additiontoan estimated dietary ironintake of11 mg/dayand 
usinganuncertaintyfactorof1.5.
Tolerableupperintakelevels(UL) 
Infantsand children(0-13years) 40mg/day 
Adolescentsand adults (14yearsand above) 45mg/day 
18.9 Researchrecommendations 
The followingpriorityareasofresearch arerecommend ed:
• Periodic assessme ntoftheiron statusofvulnerable groups,differentphysiologicalstates 
on ironrequirements such asyoung children,women ofreproductive ages,overweight, 
obesity and elderlyespeciallyin poor communities. 
• Dose-responsedatabe generatedforiron intake/statusand functionaloutcomes /health 
endpoints,e.g.growthand development inchildren,pregnancy outcome, etc.
• Studieson ironbioavailabilityofmixed dietsamong variousethnic,socioeconomic and 
vegetariangroups. 
• Intervention studies to determine the efficiency and efficacy of long-term 
supplementationofiron among women ofreproductiveage. 
336 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Iron 
18.10 References 
Al-MekhlafiM H, Surin J,AtiyaAS,AriffinWA, Mahdy AK & AbdullahHC (2008).Anaemiaand 
iron deficiency anaemiaamong aboriginalschoolchildren inruralPe ninsularMalaysia: 
anupdate on acontinuingproblem. TransR Soc Trop Med H yg 102(10):1046-52. 
Allen,LH (2000).Anem iaand irondeficiency:effects on pregnancy outcome. Am J Clin N utr 
71(5): 1280s-1284S. 
AllenLH ,de B enoistB, DaryO & HurrellR (2006).WHO/FA O G uidelines on food fortification 
withmicronutrients. G eneva:Switzerland 
Andersen HS, Gambling L,Holtrop G,McArdle HJ (2007).Effectofdietary copper deficiency 
on iron m etabolism in the pregnantrat.BrJ N utr97(2):239-46. 
B akerR D & GreerFR (2010).Diagnosisand prevention ofirondeficiency and iron-deficiency 
anem iain infantsand young children (0-3yearsofage).Pediatrics 126(5):1040-50. 
Bo thw ellTH, Charlton R W ,Cook JD & Finch CA (1979).Iron metabolisminMan. Blackwe ll 
ScientificP ublications,London,pg:18 
CollinsJF,ProhaskaJR & Knutson MD (2010).Metaboliccrossroads ofiron and copper.N utr 
Rev 68(3):133-47.
Dewey KG, Dom ellofM, Cohen RJ,LandaRiveraL,HernellO & LonnerdalB (2002).Iron 
suppleme ntationaffectsgrowth and mo rbidity of breast-fedinfants: results of a 
randomized trialin Sweden and Honduras .J Nu tr 132:3249-55. 
European Food SafetyAuthority(EFSA) (2015).ScientificOp inionon DietaryRe ference V alues 
foriron.EFSA Journal13(10):4254 
Ganz T (2013).Systemicironhom eostasis.PhysiolRev 93(4):1721-41.
GlobalB urden ofDiseasePediatrics Collaboration,Kyu HH, Pinho C,W agner JA,Br own JC, 
Bertozzi-VillaA,etal.(2016).GlobalandNationalBur den ofDiseases andInjuries Among 
Children and AdolescentsBetween 1990 and 2013:FindingsFrom theGlobalBurde n of 
Disease 2013Study.JAMA Pediatr 170(3):267-87. 
Greig AJ,Patterson AJ,Collins CE, Chalmers KA (2013).Iron deficiency,cognition,m ental 
healthand fatigue in wome n of childbearingage: a systematic review.J Nutr Sci 
29;2:e14.doi: 10.1017/jns.2013.7.
Ha llbergL & R ossander-Hulthen (1991).Iron requirementsinme nstruating women .Am J Clin 
Nu tr 54:1047-1058 
Hallberg L,Hu lthén L & GramatkovskiE (1997).Ironabsorptionfrom the wh oledietinm en:how 
effective isthe regulationofiron absorption?Am J ClinNu tr 66:347-56 
337 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Iron 
H allberg L & H ulthen L (2000).Prediction ofdietaryiron absorption:analgorithm forabsorption 
and bioavailabilityofdietaryiron.Am J ClinNu tr 71(5):1147-60 
H aniffJ,Das A,Onn LT,Sun CW ,Nordin NM ,Rampa lS,B ahrinS,GaneslingamM, Kularatnam 
KI,ZaherZM .(2007)Anem iain pregnancyinMalaysia:across-sectionalsurvey.Asia 
Pac J Clin Nutr 16:527-536. 
H urrellR & E gliI(2010).Iron bioavailability and dietaryreference values.Am J C linNutr 
91(5):1461S-1467S. 
IO M (2001).Iron.In: Dietary Reference Intakes forVitamin A, Vitamin K, A rsenic, Boron, 
Chromium, Copper,Iodine,Iron,Mangan ese,Mo lybdenum, N ickel,Silicon,Vanadium, 
and Zinc. Food and Nut ritionB oard,Institute ofM edicine.N ationalAcadem y Press, 
WashingtonDC;pp 290-393. 
Institute forP ublic Health(IPH )(2014).NationalHe alth and M orbiditySurvey 2014:Malaysian 
AdultN utrition Survey (MAN S)Vol.II:Survey F indings: 343pages. 
Institute for Pu blicH ealth (IPH )(2015).NationalHea lthand Mor biditySurvey 2015(NHMS 
2015).Vo l.II: Non -Commu nicable Diseases,R iskF actors& Other H ealth Problems; 
2015. 
IsmailM ,Loh SP ,O m arH ,Abdullah AS & Dahalan R (2001). Bioavailabilityof ironfrom 
M alaysian foodsusingCaco-2culture system. Ann Nu trMet 45(S1):49 
LindT,LönnerdalB ,StenlundH, IsmailD,SeswandhanaR,Ek ström EC & P ersson LA (2003). 
A comm unity-based randomized controlledtrialofiron and zinc supplem entationin 
Indonesianinfants:interactionsbetween ironand zinc.Am J ClinN utr 77(4):883-890 
Loh SP & Khor G L (2010).Ironintakeand irondeficiency anaemia among young women in 
KualaLumpur.MalaysianJ Med HealthSci 6:63-70. 
LozoffB, Jimenez E & SmithJB (2006).Double burden ofiron deficiency ininfancy and low 
socioeconomic status.A longitudinalanalysisofcognitivetestscores toage 19 years. 
Arch PediatrAdolescMed 160:1108-13. 
M cCord JM (2004).Iron,freeradicals and oxidative injury.J N utr 134(1):3171S-3172S 
M cLean E, Cogsw ellM, EgliI,Wojdyla D & de Ben oist B (2009)Wo rldwide prevalence of 
anaemia,WH O Vitamin and MineralN utritionInformationSystem,1993-2005.Pub lic 
H ealthNutr 12:444-454.
M ichelazzoFB, OliveiraJM, StefanelloJ,LuziaLA & Ron dó P H (2013).The influence ofvitamin 
A supplementation on ironstatus.Nutrients 5(11):4399-413. 
M inistry ofHea lthMalaysia.MalaysianFood Compos itionDatabase (MyF CD),OnlineCurrent 
V ersion: (13 th September,2016).Website: http://myfcd.moh.gov.my
338 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Iron 
MirandaM ,Olivares M ,BritoA & PizarroF (2014).Reducing irondeficiency anemiainB olivian 
schoolchildren:calcium and iron com bined versus iron suppleme ntation alone.Nutrition 
30(7-8):771-5.
NationalHealth and MedicalResearch Council(NHMRC) (2005).Nutrientreference valuesfor 
Australiaand New Zealandincluding recomme nded dietaryintakes.Canberra:
Australia.Availablefrom: 
http://www.nhmrc.gov.au/_files_nhmrc/publications/attachments/n35.pdf.
Olivares M, PizarroF,Ruz M, de Rom añaDL (2012).Acute inhibitionofironbioavailabilityby 
zinc:studies inhumans.Biom etals25(4):657-64. 
P attersonA & B lumfeildM (2009).IronDeficiencyandItsPr evention inthe Australian Context: 
A systematicReview oftheLiterature.Meat& LivestockAustralia;Ne wcastle:Australia.
Siddique A & Kowdley KV (2012).Review article:the ironoverload syndrom es.Aliment 
Pharmacol Ther 35(8):876-93. 
Steketee RW (2003).Pregnancy,nutrition andparasiticdiseases.J Nutr 133(5suppl2):1661S- 
1667S. 
Tee E S,Ism ailMN, Moh d NasirA & Khatijah I(1997 ).NutrientCo mpo sition ofM alaysian Foods. 
4th Edition.Malaysian Food CompositionDatabase Pr ogramme ,InstituteforMedical 
Research,KualaLum pur 
W HO (2001).Iron deficiency anaemia:assessment,prevention,a nd control.A guide for 
program me m anagers.Geneva,World H ealth Organization(WHO/N HD/01.3). 
WH O /FAO (2004).Iron.In:Human vitaminand mineralrequirements(2nd edition). Reportof 
aJointFA O/WHO Expert Consultation.FAO, Rome; pp 246-278. 
WH O (2007).Assessingtheiron statusofpopulations:includingliteraturereviews:reportofa 
JointWorld H ealthOrganization/CentersforDisease Controland P reventionTechnical 
Consultationon the Assessment of IronStatus atthe Pop ulation Level,G eneva, 
Switzerland 
W HO (2011).Haem oglobinconcentrations for thediagnosisofanaemia and assessme nt of 
severity.V itamin and M ineralNutrition Inform ation System.Gen eva: World Health 
Organization,(WHO /NMH /NH D/MNM/ 11.1)
WH O (2015).The globalprevalence ofanaemiain2011.Genev a:W orldHealthOrganization. 
WH O (2016).G uideline:Dailyironsupplementationininfants and children.Ge neva:Switzerland 
339 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Iron 
W ieringa FT , B erger J,Dijkhuizen MA , H idayatA, N inh NX, U tom o B, W asantwisut E , 
W inichagoon P & SEAM TIZI(South-EastAsiaM ulti-countryTrialon Iron and Zinc 
supplementation in Infants) Study Group. (2007). Comb ined iron and zinc 
supplementation in infantsimproved iron and zincstatus,but interactions reduced 
efficacyin amulti-countrytrialin SoutheastAsia.J N utr 137(2): 466-471 
X ieA,Gao J,Xu L & Men g D (2014).Shared m echanismsofneurodegenerationinAlzheimer’s 
disease and Parkinson’s disease. Biomed Re s Int 2014:648740. doi: 
10.1155/2014/648740.Epub 2014May 12. 
340 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Iron 
M alaysia 20 17* 
A ge group 
RDA
(m g/day) 
W H O/FA O (20 0 4) IOM (20 0 1) EFSA (20 15) 
A ppendix 18.1 C om parison ofrecom m ended intake forIron:,RNI M alaysia (20 17),RNI ofW H O/FA O (20 0 4),RDA ofIOM (20 0 1),and DRV of 
EFSA (20 15) 
A ge group 
RNI 
(m g/day) 
% Bioavailability 
10 15 
% Bioavailability 
5 10 12 15 
A ge group RDA 
(m g/day) A ge group DRV 
(m g/day) 
Infants Infants Infants Infants 
0 -5m onths a a 0 -6 m onths a a a a 0 -6 m onths 0.27 f 7 -12 m onths 11 
6 -12 m onths 9 6 7 -12 m onths 19 9 8 6 7 -12 m onths 11 
C hildren C hildren C hildren C hildren 
1 -3 years 6 4 1 -3 years 13 6 5 4 1 -3 years 7 1 -3 years 7
4 -6 years 6 4 4 -6 years 13 6 5 4 4 -8 years 10 4 -6 years 7
7 -9 years 9 6 7 -9 years 18 9 7 6 7 -11 years 11 
Boys Boys Boys Boys 
10 -14 years 15 10 10 -14 years 29 15 12 10 9 -13 years 8 12 -17 years 11 
15-18 years 19 12 15-18 years 38 19 16 12 14 -18 years 11 
G irls G irls G irls G irls 
10 -14 years b 14 9 10 -14 years b 28 14 12 9 9 -13 years 8 12 -17 years 13 
10 -14 years 33 22 10 -14 years 65 33 28 22 14 -18 years 15 
15-18 years 31 21 15-18 years 62 31 26 21 
M en M en M en M en 
19 -65years 14 9 19 -65years 27 14 11 9 19 -30 years 8 ≥ 18 years 11 
> 65years 14 9 > 65years 27 14 11 9 31 -50 years 8
51 -70 years 8
> 70 years 8
341 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Iron 
M alaysia 20 17)* 
A ge group 
RDA
(m g/day) 
W H O/FA O (20 0 4) IOM (20 0 1) EFSA (20 15) 
A ge group 
RNI 
(m g/day) 
% Bioavailability 
10 15 
% Bioavailability 
5 10 12 15 
A ge group RDA 
(m g/day) A ge group DRV 
(m g/day) 
W om en W om en W om en W om en 
19 -50 years c 29 20 19 -50 years c 59 29 24 20 19 -30 years 18 ≥ 18 years 
51 -65years d 11 8 51 -65years d 23 11 9 8 31 -50 years 18 P rem enopausal 16 
> 65years d 11 8 > 65years 23 11 9 8 51 -70 years 8 P ostm enopausal 11 
> 70 years 8
Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy 
1st trim ester e e 1st trim ester e e e e 14 -18 years 27 As fornon-pregnantprem enopausalw om en
2nd trim ester e e 2nd trim ester e e e e 19 -30 years 27 
3rd trim ester e e 3rd trim ester e e e e 31 -50 years 27 
Lactation Lactation Lactation Lactation 
0 -3 m onths 15 10 0 -3 m onths 30 15 13 10 14 -18 years 10 As fornon-lactating prem enopausalw om en 
4 -6 m onths 15 10 4 -6 m onths 30 15 13 10 19 -30 years 9
7 -12 m onths 15 10 7 -12 m onths 30 15 13 10 31 -50 years 9
7 -12 m onths g 32 21 
*R ecom m endation sim ilarto R N I(2005) 
a-N eonataliron stores are sufficientto m eetthe iron requirem entforthe firstsix m onths in fullterm infants.P rem ature infants and low birth w eightinfants require additional 
iron. 
b - N on-m enstruating adolescents c - P re-m enopausal d -M enopausal e - Itis recom m ended thatiron supplem ents in tabletform be given to allpregnantw om en because of 
the difficulties in correctly evaluating iron status in pregnancy.In the non-anaem ic pregnantw om an,daily supplem ents of100 m g ofiron (e.g.,as ferrous sulphate)given during 
the second halfofpregnancy are adequate.In anaem ic w om en higherdoses are usually required. f- Average intake g -Lactating w om en w ith m enstruation 
342 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
19 • Iodine 
19.1 Introduction 
Iodine w asdiscovered by Be rnard Courtois in1811.As thehuma n body isunableto 
produce iodinefor itsneeds,iodine m ustcom e from dietarysources.Oceans are thew orld’s 
main repositories ofiodine and very littleof earthsiodine is actuallyfound in the soil.The 
depositionofiodineinthe soiloccurs due to volatilizationfrom ocean w ater,aprocess aided 
by ultravioletradiation.The coastalregionsoftheworldaremuc h richeriniodinecontentthan 
thesoilsfurther inland;here theproblem getsmore com pounde d by continuousleechingof 
iodinefrom thesoilincludingthroughflooding.Therefore,the crops grown insuch soilremain 
iodinedeficient;even ground waterin theseareasisdeficientiniodine.
19.2 Functions
Iodineis anessentialtraceelementrequired forthesynthesisofthe thyroidhormone s, 
thyroxine(T 4)andtriiodothyronine(T 3).The hum anbody contains 15-20mg ofiodinew ith 70- 
80% beinglocated inthe thyroidgland.Iodinethatistakenup inthethyroidgland isoxidized 
by hydrogen peroxide and thyroid peroxidase.The oxidized (active)iodine isattachedto a 
glycoprotein called thyroglobulin.The activeiodinereactswith the tyrosine compon entsof 
thyroglobulintoform 3-monoiodotyrosine (MITs)and 3,5-diiodotyrosine(DITs).The MITs and 
DITs are coupledtoform theactive thyroidhormones,T 3 and T 4.These thyroid hormone s are 
stored insidethe thyroid folliclesasthemain component ofthethyroidcolloid.The colloidisa 
gycoproteincalledthyroglobulin.The storedhormones canmee tthebody requirem entsforup 
to3 mont hs. 
Thyroidhormones areessentialforlife as they regulatekey biochem icalreactions, 
especiallyproteinsynthesis andenzymaticactivities,in targetorganssuch asarethe developing 
brain,m uscle,heart,pituitaryand kidney. 
19.3 Metabolism 
Iodine is metabolized inthe hum an body through a seriesofstages w iththe thyroid 
glandplayingacentralrole.Thyroid secretion isregulatedby pituitaryglandthrough thyroid- 
stimu lating hormo ne (TSH) ,wh ichoperateson a feed-back me chanism tuned to T 4 levelin 
blood.A fallin T 4 levelstimulates the pituitary to increase itsTSH secretion,which inturn 
stimulates thethyroidglandtoreleaseT 4 in circulation to ma intainnorm allevelofthe horm one 
inblood.
Pr oteolytic enzymes subsequentlyreleaseT 3 and T 4,from thyroglobulinintotheblood. 
Wh en these hormone s are utilized in variousbody cells,theyarereplaced by T 3 and T 4 from the 
bound pool.The liberatediodine may be reutilized by thethyroidgland,w hiletheremainder 
iodineisexcretedin theurine.Typically,urine containsmore than90% ofallingestediodine. 
Most ofthe remainder isexcreted infeces and a sma llamou nt ma y be lostinswe at(IO M, 
2001). 
343 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Iodine 
19.4 Deficiencies 
Iodine insufficiency induces anincreasein TSH inresponse todecreased productionof 
thyroidhormone. Goitredevelops asaconsequence ofthestimulationactionofTSH. Serious 
iodine deficiencyalso leads to functional and developmen tal abnorm alities such as 
hypothyroidism.H ypothyroidism causesphysicaland men talretardationininfantsandchildren. 
In neonate,iodine deficiency causesperinatalmor tality,infantmor talityand low birthweight. 
Severe iodinedeficiency in the fetaland neonatalperiod m ay lead to cretinism,which is 
characterizedby stunted growth,ment aland other neurologicalretardation,and delay in 
development ofsecondarysex characteristics.
Inadequateiodinestatus inpregnantwom en can affectcognitiveoutcomes inchidren. 
Avon LongitudinalStudyofParentsand Children (ALSP AC )found thatchildren ofwomen w ith 
aniodine-to-creatinineratio oflessthan150µg/gwe remor e likelyto have scores inthelowest 
quartile forverbalIQ,reading accuracyand readingcomp rehensionthan w erethoseofmothers 
w ithratios of150µg/gor more (Sarahetal., 2013). 
In adults,iodine deficiency causes reductioninm entalfunction andlethargy (WHO/ FAO, 
2004). This diversearrayofiodine deficiency problems in differentage groups isdescribed as 
Iodine Deficiency Disorder (IDD).IDDincludes me ntalretardation,hypothyroidism,goitre, 
cretinismand varyingdegreesofothergrowthand developmentalabnormalitiesas aresultof 
iodineinsufficiency(IOM, 2001).
G lobaliodinestatus continues toimprov e (IGN,2015).The numbe r ofiodinedeficient 
countrieshasmore thanhalvedinpastdecade.Therehave been no countries inthe“severely 
deficient” category (i.e.,with a me dianU IC <2 0 µg/L).Thisrem arkableprogress reflects a 
grow ingglobalawarenessofIDD andthe trem endous successofiodization programs especially 
U niversalSaltIodization(USI).H owever,IDDrema insasignificantpublichealthproblem in25 
countries. 
In 199 4-96,the MinistryofHea lth(MOH) Malaysia conducted a NationalIDD Survey 
involving almost12,000schoolchildrenaged8-10years.Based on the W HO/ICCIDDreference, 
the survey found a goitreprevalence of0.7% in Sarawak,2.2% inPe ninsularM alaysiaand 
18% in Sabah (Kiyu,Zainab & Yahaya,19 98 ; MO H, 2003).The m edian urinaryiodine 
concentrationwas 66.0µg/lin Sabah,82.2µg/lintheP eninsularand 126.0µg/linSarawak. 
Sarawak w aspartiallygazetted insome districtsand sub-districtto implement USIin1990. 
How ever,monitoringatthe state levelfound gazettedareasstillshowed alow iodineintake,and 
thus,the entirestate was gazettedon July3,2008torequiretheuse ofiodised salt.The iodine 
statusofthe statehasimproved since theimplementation ofUSI.
344 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Iodine 
As for Sabah,a state-levelprogramme for USIw asfullyimplemented by June 2000. 
The situationinSabahhasimproved asmonitoringofschoolchildren aged 8-10yearsin2002 
found them edianurinaryiodinelevelat240µg/l. 
In2008,MOH Malaysia conducted another N ationalIDD Survey thatincluded almost 
18,078 schoolchildrenaged 8-10years(MOH Malaysia,2009).A totalof18,012 urine samp les 
were collectedand analysed forurinary iodineconcentration.The overallme dian urinary iodine 
concentration for M alaysia was found to be withinborderline adequacy at109.0µg/l.The 
median urinaryiodine concentration was 101.9µg/linSarawak,104.1 µg/lin P eninsular 
Malaysiaand 150.2µg/lin Sabah.IntheP eninsula,sixstates were foundtobe iodinedeficient 
(me dianurinaryiodine concentration <100 µg/l)name ly,Kedah (85.2µg/l),Pen ang (85.8 µg/l), 
Per ak(77.6µg/l)and Pahang (76.5µg/l),Terengganu(78.7µg/l)and Kelantan(76.9µg/l). 
Some ofthe causesforiodine deficiencyinMalaysiaincludelow iodinecontentofsoil 
and water,inadequate iodine content inlocalfoods,consump tion ofgoiterogenicfoods and 
low consumpt ionofmarine seafood.
The M OH Malaysiahas taken action to prevent and control IDD through the 
implementationofuniversalsaltiodization forthew holeM alaysia,and continuinghealthand 
nutritioneducation.
19.5 Sources
The iodinecontentoffoods depends on the iodine contentofthesoilin which itisgrown. 
Seawaterisarichsourceofiodine.Seaweeds and fish,which thriveon seawee ds,are alsorich 
iniodine.Populations living neartheseaand consum ingseaweeds and reeffish,such as the 
Japanese,haveahighintakeofiodine.
A wide varietyoffood contains iodine including eggs,mea t,milkand milkproducts, 
cerealgrains,dried legum es,dried vegetables anddriedfruits,butthegood sources arelimited 
to ma rine fishes and shellfish.The iodine contentoffoods varieswith geographic location, 
ranging widely from 30µg/100g to800µg/100g (WHO/F AO, 2004).He nce,the average iodine 
contentoffoodsfrom one countrycannotbe universallyused forestimatingtheiodineintake 
foranotherpopulation.Exampl es ofiodine contentinfoods are show n inTable19.1. 
345 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Iodine 
Table19.1:Iodinecontentoffoods 
Fishand shellfish 
Siputsedut(Snail) 850.9 
Ikanbilis(Anchovy)dried 144.0 
Kupang (Mussels) 113.2 
Kepah(Clam) 92.7 
Kerang(Cockles 92.6 
Kembung (M ackerel,Indian)fried 56.1 
Kembung (M ackerel,Indian)dried 50.7 
Tenggiri(M ackerel,Spanish)raw 48.7 
Selar(Trevally)raw -small 44.0 
Kerapu (Cod,coral/Grouper)raw 41.7 
P ari(Stingray)raw 41.7 
Kembung (M ackerel,Indian)grilled 37.4 
Sardin(Sardine)raw 36.7 
Selar(Trevally)raw -large 35.1 
IkanMer ah(Snapper,red)raw 33.4 
Ketam (Crab) 33.3 
Kembung (M ackerel,Indian)boiled 33.0 
Lala(Clam,P aphiaundulata) 30.6 
Kerisi(Br eam,threadfin,Japanese)raw 25.6 
Kembung (M ackerel,Indian)raw 24.8 
M abong (Mackerel,Island)raw 23.5 
Udang kecil(Shrimp)raw 19.1 
Udang galah(P rawn,G iantfreshwater)raw 19.1 
Siakap(Perch,sea/Barramundi)raw 14.3 
TilapiaMerah (Bream ,African,red)raw 12.8 
Sotong(Squid) 11.5 
Tilapia(Bream, African)raw 9.9 
Udang besar(P rawn)raw 7.8 
Keli (Catfish)raw 4.1 
Eggs 
Telurayam (Egg,chicken) 26.8 
Teluritik (Egg, duck) 14.0 
M eat 
D aging lembu (Beef) 7.0 
D aging ayam (Chicken) 6.2 
Food µg/100g 
346 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Iodine 
Food Iodine (µg/100g) 
Milk and milkproducts 
Susu Tepung (M ilk,powd er) 92.1 
Keju(Cheese) 62.8 
Krimer m anis(Sweetened creamer) 39.2 
Yogurt(Yogurt) 26.7 
Susu segar(Milk,fresh) 20.2 
Minum anyogurt(Yogurtdrink) 19.5 
Mentega(B utter) 10.4 
Cer eal,legumes and nuts 
Ber as(R ice) 13.4 
Tepung gandum (Wheatflour) 10.4 
Ber aspulut(Glutinousrice) 9.65 
Barli(Barley) 4.5 
Fruits and vegetables 
Rumpai laut(Seaweed)dried 1457.4 
Bayam (Spinach) 29.7 
Pisang(Banana) 19.6 
Bijibunga teratai(Lotusseed) 13.3 
Taugeh (Bean sprout) 5.5 
Delima(Pom egranate) 4.6 
Kedondong (Am barella) 4.5 
Lobak (Carrot) 4.4 
Miscellaneous
Biskutberasdengan rum pailaut(Rice crackerswithseawee d) 154.6 
Kerepek kentangdengan rumpailaut(Potatochipswithseaweed) 46.6 
Sushi(Sushi) 24.3 
Garam beriodin(Iodizedsalt)* 2000-4000 
Source: SalinaM d Taib (2017)– PhD thesis (unpublished) 
* Department ofStatistics,M alaysia-Regulation 285,Food Act 1983 (Act 281)& R egulations(As atJanuary 
2014) 
347 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Iodine 
The N ationalIDD Survey2008forMalaysiaincludeddeterminingconsumption patterns 
ofiodinerichfoods.More than90% oftheschoolchildren consumed chicken eggs and seafish 
as their sources ofiodine.Chicken eggs and seafishconstituted the highestm ean quantity 
daily intake offood high in iodine at26.47g and 24.05g respectively.Chicken eggs and seafish 
remained ashighestm eanquantityweekly intake offoodhighiniodineat186.6g and 169.2g 
respectively.
O verall,only7.0%ofthe households surveyed inPen insularMalaysia consumed salt 
w ithiodinelevelmore than15ppm, compa red to83% inSabah (fullygazetted)and 43% in 
Sarawak(partially gazetted).O verall,nationally,only15.5%.ofthepopulationconsume d salt 
w ithiodine levelmore than15ppm.
19.6 FactorsA ffectingIodine Requirements 
Iodine is ingestedinavarietyofchemicalform infood.Most ingestediodineisreduced 
inthe gutand absorbed almostcompletely.Some iodinecontainingcompounds are absorbed 
intact.The thyroidselectivelyconcentrates iodide intheamoun tsrequired foradequatethyroid 
hormone synthesis.The thyroidglandtrapsapproximately60µg perdayiodinetoma intainan 
adequatesupplyof thyroxine (IOM ,2001).Severalother tissues alsoconcentrate iodine, 
includingsalivary glands,breast,choroids plexus and gastricm ucosa.
U ndernorm alcircumstances,the absorption ofdietaryiodine isgreaterthan9 0%. W hen 
thyroxine isgiven orally,the bioavailabilityisapproximately75%.Howe ver,severalmineralsand 
traceelements (e.giron,selenium, zinc andvitaminA)are essentialfornorm althyroid hormon e 
m etabolism(Zimmerm ann & Köhrle,2002;Sonja,2010).These micronutrientsarenecessary 
for the utilization ofiodine forthyroidhormon e synthesis.Selenium deficiency forexample, 
inhibits theconversion ofT4 toT3 inliver.Iron deficiency impa irs thyroidme tabolismleading 
to aninabilityto controlbody temperature.Due tovitaminA’s roleiniron absorptionfrom the 
intestine and mo bilisationofiron from theliver,inadequate vitaminA resulting in low bod y iron 
canleadto impairedproductionofthyroidhormone . 
Soy flourhasbeen show n toinhibitiodineabsorption,andwhe n iodine was added tothis 
formula,goitredid notappear(IOM,2001).Some foodscontain goitrogens thataresubstances 
thatinterfere w ith thyroid hormone production or utilization. E xamp lesinclude cassava, 
crucifera vegetables(cabbage,broccoli,cauliflower),bam boo shoots,maize,limabeans and 
millet.Most ofthesesubstancesarenotofmajorclinicalimportance unless thereisco-existing 
iodinedeficiency (IOM,2001). 
Thereare som e medicationsforanoveractive thyroid (anti-thyroiddrugs)and highblood 
pressure thatinteractwithiodinemetabolism.These me dicationsshouldbe taken w ithcaution 
ornottobe taken atallwhen taking iodinesupplements.Takingiodinesupplementsalongw ith 
anti-thyroiddrugs causetoomuch iodineintheblood.Too muc h iodineinthebloodcancause 
sideeffects thataffectthyroid functions.Also,as most iodinesupplements containpotassium, 
takingpotassiumiodide along withsom e me dicationsfor highblood pressure ma y lead toa 
rapidloss ofpotassiumfrom thebody. 
348 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Iodine 
19.7 SettingRequirements and Recom mended Intake
Indicators forestim atingrequireme ntsfor iodine includes using the dailyuptakeand 
release (turnover)ofiodineinthebody,urinaryiodineexcretion,thyroid size and iodine balance. 
Urinaryiodineexcretion,thyroid size using ultrasonography,thyroid stimulating hormon e (TSH ) 
and thyroglobulin (Tg)aretheindicatorsrecomme nded by theW HO/UNICEF /ICCIDD (2007) 
forassessingiodinenutrition worldwide.
The WH O/ FAO (2004)expertconsultation and the IO M (2001)reports arethe main 
references used by the TechnicalSub-Committee (TSC)form inerals requirem ent.The rationale 
and approaches used by thesereports were considered.Severallocalreportson thema gnitude 
ofIDD and the interventionm easurestakenwere alsoconsidered as usefulreferences.
Since there islack ofscientific data on iodine requiremen tsinMalaysia,the TSC has 
recom mended the approachused by theWHO /FAO (2004).The actualRN Is forM alaysiaare 
based on the body weights of the localpopulation(Introduction ChapterTable1.1).The 
recom mended intakes foriodine for Malaysiansofvariousagegroups aregiven inbold inthe 
followingparagraphsaccording toagegroups. 
Infants
No functionalcriteriaofiodinestatushavebeen demons trated thatreflectresponse to 
dietary intake of iodine ininfants.The DRI comm ittee of IOM (2001)therefore based the 
recom mended intakeofiodine on an adequate intakethatreflectstheobserved m ean iodine 
intakeofinfants fed exclusivelyon human milk.The WHO/F AO (2004)Consultationalsoused 
asimilarapproachto estimatingrecommended intakesforthisage group.
Iodine requirementsin infancyarederived from the iodine contentinhum an milkin 
infants growingata satisfactoryrate.The iodine contentin human milk isa functionofthe 
iodineintakeofthepopulation.Ithasbeen reportedtorange from 20-330µg/linEurope and 
from 30-490 µg/lin the U nited States.Am ong populationgroups with severe iodinedeficiency, 
itcould be as low as 12 µg/l.An averagehuman-milkintakeof750ml/day w ouldgiveaniodine 
intakeofabout60µg/dayin Europe and 120µg/dayinUSA .Pos itive iodinebalance,which is 
required fortheincreasingstoresofthethyroid,intheinfantisachieved onlywhen theiodine 
intake isatleast15µg/kg/dayin full-terminfantsand 30 µg/kg/day in pre-term infants 
(W HO /FAO ,2004).Usingthe reference weightsforMalaysianinfants,the TSC forM inerals and 
TraceElements had recomm ended theintakeofiodineforchildren tobe asfollows. 
RN I forinfantsboys (fullterm)
0 -2 m onths 67.5 µg/day 
3 -5 m onths 105.0 µg/day 
6 -8 m onths 124.5µg/day 
9 -11 m onths 138.0 µg/day 
349 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Iodine 
RNI forinfants girls(fullterm)
0 -2 m onths 63.0 µg/day 
3 -5 m onths 96.0 µg/day 
6 -8 m onths 114.0 µg/day 
9 -11 m onths 127.5µg/day 
Children 
The DRIComm ittee (IOM,2001)had based the estimated requirement for iodine in 
children 1-9yearson two balancestudies.RDAs were thencalculatedbased on 140% ofthe 
requirement.
The daily iodine needs on a body w eight basis decreases with age.The iodine 
recomm endationby WHO/F AO (2004)forchildrenis6 µg/kg/day forages 1-6years and 4 
µg/kg/dayfor ages7-12years.U sing them ean body we ightasthatisdeemed appropriatefor 
M alaysianchildren,theTSC forMinerals and Trace Eleme ntshad recom mended theintake of 
iodinefor children tobe asfollows.
RNI forchildrenboys 
1 -3 years 73.2 µg/day 
4 -6 years 109.8 µg/day 
7 -9 years 101.6 µg/day 
RNI forchildrengirls 
1 -3 years 69.0 µg/day 
4 -6 years 109.2 µg/day 
7 -9 years 100.0 µg/day 
Adolescentsand adults 
Inadolescentsand adults,m ostdietary iodine eventuallyappears intheurine,so the 
urinary iodineconcentrationis ausefulmeasure forassessingiodineintake.A urinaryiodine 
concentrationofabove 100µg/lcorresponds toadietaryiodineintake of150µg/day.Urinary 
iodine values below 100µg/lare associated with increases inthyroidsizeand serum TSH . 
W HO/ UN ICEF/ICCIDD (1996) proposed that150µg/day iodine in adolescents and adults
(12 yearsand above)providesthe necessaryintake tomaintainplasma iodide levelabove the 
criticallimitof0.10µg/dL and m aintainiodine stores ofthe thyroid.SimilartoWHO/FAO (2004), 
the MalaysianRNI for iodinefor adolescents and adults iscalculated based on 2 µg/kg/day, 
m akinguse ofthemean body weightsofthelocalpopulation.
350 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Iodine 
RN I foradolescentboys 
10 -12 years 133.6 µg/day 
13 -15 years 99.2 µg/day 
16 -18 years 118.4µg/day 
RN I foradolescentgirls 
10 -12 years 141.6 µg/day 
13 -15 years 93.0 µg/day 
16 -18 years 100.6 µg/day 
RN I foradults 
Men 
19 -29 years 122.8µg/day 
30 -59 years 121.2µg/day 
≥ 60 years 116.2 µg/day 
Women 
19 -29 years 105.8 µg/day 
30 -59 years 104.4 µg/day 
≥ 60 years 99.0 µg/day 
Pregnancy & Lactation 
The iodinerequirem entduring pregnancy isincreased toprovidethe needs ofthe foetus 
and to comp ensatefor the increased loss ofiodine intheurineresultingfrom an increased 
renalclearance ofiodineduringpregnancy.These requirementshave been derived from studies 
ofthyroidfunctionduringpregnancyand in theneonateunder conditionsofmoderateiodine 
deficiency.These dataindicated thattheiodineintake required topreventtheonsetofsubclinical 
hypothyroidismofmother and foetus duringpregnancy,and thustopreventthepossiblerisk 
ofbraindamage ofthefoetus,isapproximately3.5µg/kg/dayor200µg/day(WHO /FA O,2004). 
The TSC for Minerals and Trace Elements on M inerals decided to adopt the sam e 
recom mendationsfortheproposed MalaysianRNI.
RN I for
Pregnancy 200 µg/day 
Lactation 200 µg/day 
351 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Iodine 
D iscussion on comparison ofrecom mended intake ofiodine 
Compared totheiodineintakerecommendations by W H O/F AO (2004),IOM (2001)had 
recomm ended higherintakesforallagegroups exceptforinfants(7-11months)and children 
(1-13years).The R DA for pregnancyand lactation,particularlythelatter,w ere alsohigherin 
the latterrecomm endation.The latterhad alsoma de thesame recomm endations foradultsof 
allages and also for both sexes as itw as feltthatthere is no evidence to suggestthatthe 
average iodine requirem entisaltered withaging,or to have differences based on gender in 
adults.
The TSC forMineralsand TraceElements had taken on theapproach oftheWHO/ FAO 
(2004)inderivingatR NIforiodine.H ow ever,aspreviouslymentioned,the TSC hadsettheR NI 
based on them ean body we ightofMalaysians.H ence,due tothelower reference body weights 
ofMalaysians,the dailyrecomme nded iodine intakes areslightlylow erthanthe valuesproposed 
by W H O/F AO (2004)(Appendix19.1). 
19.8 TolerableUpper IntakeLevels
M ostpeoplearevery tolerantto excess iodineintake from food withtheexceptionof 
certain subgroups with autoim m une thyroiddiseaseand iodine deficiency.High intakesofiodine 
from food,w aterand supplements have been associated with thyroiditus,goitre(due to 
increased TSH stimulation),hypothyroidism ,hyper-thyroidism,sensitivity reactions,thyroid 
papillary cancerandacuteresponsesinsome individuals.Symptoms ofacuteiodinepoisoning 
includeburningofthe mouth,throat,and stomach,abdominalpain,fever,nausea,vomiting, 
diarrhoea,weak pulse,cardiacirritability,coma and cyanosis(IO M, 2001).
The recom mendationsofIOM (2001)fortheupperlimitsofintakes foriodineare given 
inTable19.2. 
352 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Iodine 
Table 19.2:Tolerable upper intake levels (UL)foriodineforvarious age groups 
Group mg/ day iodine 
Infants Not possible toestablish 
Children 
1 -3 years 200 
4 -8 years 300 
9 -13years 600 
Adolescents,14-18years 900 
Adults,≥ 19 years 1,100 
Pregnantw omen 
14 -18 years 900 
> 19 years 1,100 
Lactatingw omen 
14 -18 years 900 
> 19 years 1,100 
Source: IOM (2001) 
19.9 Research Recomm endations 
Pr iorityareasofresearchrecomm ended areasfollows
• Determine iodineintakeand food sourcesamong communitiesofvariousages. 
• R elationshipbetween iodine deficiencyand mental/cognitive performance and imm une 
statusin children. 
• Interactionsofcommon micronutrientdeficiencieswithiodineand thyroidmetabolism 
ininfantsand pregnantwomen.
353 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Iodine 
19.10 References 
Department ofStatistics,Malaysia(2014).Food Act 1983 (Act 281)& Regulations (As at 
January 2014).P ublisher& printerby M DC PublisherPrinters. 
IGN (2015).GlobalScorecard2014:Num ber ofiodinedeficientcountriesmor e than halved in 
pastdecade.IDD Newsletter Vol.43No.1 Fe b 2015;pp 5-7. 
IOM (2001).Iodine.In: D ietaryReferenceIntakesfor Vitamin A, VitaminK, Arsenic,Boron, 
Chromium, Copper,Iodine,Iron,Mangan ese,Mo lybdenum, N ickel,Silicon,Vanadium, 
and Zinc. Food and Nut ritionB oard,Institute ofM edicine.N ationalAcadem y Press, 
WashingtonDC;pp 258-289. 
Kiyu A,Zainab T & YahayaA (1998).Iodine deficiency disordersin Sarawak. AsiaPac J ClinNutr 
(7):256-261. 
M inistryofHealthM alaysia(2003).AnnualReport2002.DivisionofF amily He althDevelopme nt, 
M inistryofHealthMalaysia,KualaLumpur. 
M inistry ofH ealthMalaysia (2009).NationalIodine Deficiency Disorder (IDD) Survey 2008. 
Institute forP ublic Health,KualaLumpur . 
SalinaMd Taib(2017).Faktor-faktoryang berkaitandengan kejadianparasiodintinggidalam 
kalangan pelajarsekolahrendah WP Putrajaya: Satu kajiankomu niti.DoctoralThesis 
(Unpublished),NationalU niversityofMalaysia. 
Sarahet al(2013).Effectof inadequateiodine status in UK pregnantwo m en on cognitive 
outcom es in their children: resultsfrom the Avon LongitudinalStudy ofP arentsand 
Children (ALSPAC ).Lancet, 382;331-337.
SonjaY.H ess (2010).The impact ofcomm on micronutrientdeficiencies on iodineand thyroid 
m etabolism: the evidence from human studies.Best Practice & Research C linical 
Endocrinology & Metabolism. Feb 2010,V ol.24,No. 1:117-132 
WH O/FA O (2004).Iodine.In: Vitaminand mineralrequirementsinhuman nutrition. 2nd E dition. 
R eportofaJointFA O/WHO Expert Consultation.FA O,pp 303-317 
W HO/ UN ICEF/ICCDD (1996 ).Recommended Iodine Levels in Salt and Guidelines for 
M onitoring their Adequacy and Effectiveness.R eportofa Joint W HO /UNICEF/ICCDD 
Consultant.World H ealth Organization,Ge neva 
W HO /UNICEF/ICCIDD(2007).Assessme ntofIodine DeficiencyDisordersand Mo nitoringtheir 
Elimination. A G uideforProgram me Managers.3rd Edition.Wor ldHealthOrganization, 
G eneva.
Zimme rmann & Köhrle (2002).The impac tofironand selenium deficiencies on iodineand 
thyroid m etabolism:biochemistry andrelevance topublichealth.Thyroid (10):867-878 
354 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Iodine 
M alaysia (20 17) W H O/ FA O (20 0 4) IOM (20 0 1) 
A ge group RNI (µg/day) 
M alaysia (20 0 5) 
A ge group RNI (µg/day) A ge group RNI (µg/day) A ge group RNI (µg/day) 
A ppendix 19 .1:C om parison ofrecom m ended intake forIodine:RNI M alaysia (20 17),RNI W H O/ FA O (20 0 4),A I and RDA IOM (20 0 1) 
Infants Infants Infants Infants 
Boys 
0 -2 m onths 67.5 0 -5m onths 9 0 0 -6 m onths 9 0 0 - 6 m onths 110 
3 -5m onths 105.0 6 -11 m onths 120 7 -12 m onths 135 7 -12 m onths 130 
6 -8 m onths 124.5
9 -11 m onths 138.0 
Infants Infants Infants Infants 
G irls G irls 
0 -2 m onths 63.0 0 -5m onths 9 0 
3 -5m onths 9 6.0 6 -11 m onths 120 
6 -8 m onths 114.0 
9 -11 m onths 127.5 RDA (µg/day) 
C hildren C hildren C hildren C hildren 
Boys Boys Boys Boys 
1 -3 years 73.2 1 -3 years 72 1 -3 years 75 1 -3 years 9 0 
4 -6 years 109 .8 4 -6 years 108 4 -6 years 110 4 -8 years 9 0 
7 -9 years 101.6 7 -9 years 104 7 -9 years 100 
C hildren C hildren 
G irls G irls 
1 -3 years 69 .0 1 -3 years 72 
4 -6 years 109 .2 4 -6 years 108 
7 -9 years 100.0 7 -9 years 104 
A dolescents A dolescents A dolescents 
Boys Boys Boys 
10 -12 years 133.6 10 -12 years 144 10 -11 years 135 9 -13 years 120 
13 -15years 9 9 .2 13 -14 years 106 > 12 years 110 14 -18 years 150 
16 -18 years 118.4 15years 106 
16 -18 years 118 
355 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Iodine 
A ge group RNI (µg/day) A ge group RNI (µg/day) A ge group RNI (µg/day) A ge group RNI (µg/day) 
A dolescents A dolescents A dolescents A dolescents 
G irls G irls G irls G irls 
10 -12 years 141.6 10 -12 years 148 10 -11 years 140 9 -13 years 120 
13 -15years 9 3.0 13 -14 years 9 8 > 12 years 100 14 -18 years 150 
16 -18 years 100.6 15years 9 8 
16 -18 years 104 
A dults A dults A dults 
M en M en M en 
19 -29 years 122.8 19 -29 years 124 19 -65years 130 19 -30 years 150 
30 -59 years 121.2 30 -50 years 124 > 65years 130 31 -50 years 150 
≥ 60 years 116.2 51 -59 years 124 51 -70 years 150 
60 -65years 124 > 70 years 150 
≥ 65years 114 
A dults A dults A dults 
W om en W om en W om en 
19 -29 years 105.8 19 -29 years 110 19 -65years 110 19 -30 years 150 
30 -59 years 104.4 30 -50 years 110 > 65years 110 31 -50 years 150 
≥ 60 years 9 9 .0 51 -59 years 110 51 -70 years 150 
60 -65years 110 > 70 years 150 
≥ 65years 9 8 
Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy 
1st trim ester 200 1st trim ester 200 1st trim ester 200 14 -18 years 220 
2nd trim ester 200 2nd trim ester 200 2nd trim ester 200 19 -30 years 220 
3rd trim ester 200 3rd trim ester 200 3rd trim ester 200 31 -50 years 220 
Lactation Lactation Lactation 
0 -3 m onths 200 1st 6 m onths 200 0 -3 m onths 200 14 -18 years 29 0 
4 -6 m onths 200 2nd m onths 200 4 -6 m onths 200 19 -30 years 29 0 
7 -12 m onths 200 7 -12 m onths 200 31 -50 years 29 0 
M alaysia (20 17) W H O/ FA O (20 0 4) IOM (20 0 1) M alaysia (20 0 5) 
356 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
20 • Zinc 
20.1 Introduction 
Zincisthe 24th mo stabundantelem entinthe Earth’scrustand existsasastabledivalent 
cation.Itsessentiality was firstestablished inplants and later inexperim entalanimalsand 
huma ns.B esides dietary sources,zinc isnorm allyfound insm allam ountsinnature (water, 
soiland rock).Zincis alsoreleasedintotheenvironment(air,waterand soil)throughhuman 
activitiessuch asm ining,smelting,metalproductionand coalburning. 
Inbiologicalsystems,zincexists asZn 2+ and is presentin allorgans,tissues,fluids and 
secretions inthe bod y.The totalbody zinccontenthas been estimated to be 2 g inadults, 
rangingfrom approximately1.5g inwomen to2.5g inmen. Nearly90% oftotalbody zincis 
in m uscle and bone and the restis distributedin other organs such as prostate,liver, 
gastrointestinaltract,kidney,skin,lung,brain,heart,and pancreas (W HO /FAO, 2004).
20.2 Functions 
Zincasanutrienthasimportantcatalytic,structuraland regulatoryfunctions(Kingand 
Cousins,2014).Itisanessentialcomponent ofthe catalyticsiteorsites ofatleastone enzyme 
ineachofthe sixclassesofenzym es.As acomponent ofme tallo-enzyme s,zincalsoprovides 
structuralintegrity to theprotein.Itserves asanecessarystructuralcompone ntofDNA -binding 
proteinsthatcontains zincfingers.Finally,asanintracellularregulatoryion,zincisinvolvedin 
gene expression,synapticsignalling and apoptosis (programmed celldeath)andprotein kinase 
C activity. 
The three generalfunctions of zincarerelated to celldivision and growth,nutrient 
met abolism, gene expression,imm uno-competence, neurobehavioraldevelopme nt and 
reproductivefunction. Zinc stabilises the molecularstructure of cellularcom ponents and 
membr anesand contributesinthis way tothemaintenanceofcelland organ integrity.Itisa 
com ponentofvarious enzym es participatinginthesynthesisand degradationofcarbohydrates, 
lipids,proteins,and nucleicacidsas w ellas inthemetabolism ofother micronutrients.The 
presenceofzincisnecessaryin the making ofgeneticmaterial,includingtranscriptionofDNA 
and translationofRN A.Zinc playsa centralroleintheimmune system, affectingvirtuallyall 
aspects of cellularand humoral imm unity.Zinc alsoinfluences behaviour and learning 
perform ance aswe llasquantityand qualityofsperms.Itsinvolvement insuch fundamental 
activitiesprobablyaccountsforthe essentialityofzincforalllifeforms. 
20.3 Metabolism 
Absorption ofdietary zincmostlyoccursintheupper smallintestineand isafunctionof 
the quantityofbioavailablezinc ingested.Zincisexcretedmainlyinthefaeces whileotherminor 
routes ofendogenous zinclossesareurine and integum ent.There isno majorstoragesitefor 
zinc althoughliverand bone provide limited store ofzincfor releaseinto the circulation as 
needed.Zincistransportedinboth portaland systemiccirculation,ma inlyby albumin.There 
aremetaboliczincpools in bod y tissues and organs thatexchange withplasma zincand is 
thoughttorepresentthemost metabolically activeportionoftotalbody zinc.The zincpoolin 
softtissues,particularlyliver,rapidly exchanges withzincinplasma and accountsfor about 
10% oftotalbody zinc(M iller,Krebs & Ham bidge,2000).
357 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Zinc 
20.4 Sources
Zinc is widelydistributed infoods and istypicallyassociated w ith the proteinfractionand/ 
ornucleic fractionoffood.Zincism ostabundantinfoods highinproteinsuch as organmeats, 
m eat,poultry,fish and shellfish and lesseramounts ineggs and dairyproducts (Table20.1). 
N uts,seeds,legumes and whole grain cereals(especiallybran and germ) have relativelyhigh 
zinccontent,w hiletubers,refinedcereals,fruitsand vegetableshave less.Zinc from foodsof 
animaloriginhashigherbioavailabilitythanthatfrom foods ofplantorigindue tothepresence 
ofphytatethatisinhibitoryofzinc uptake by theintestine.Zinc m ayalsobe added toprocessed 
foods and food supplementsassaltsofthedivalentcation.
Table20.1 Zinccontentoffoods.
Food m g/100 g 
Liver,kidney(beef,poultry) 4.2-6.1 
M eat(beef,pork) 2.9-4.7 
P oultry 1.8-3.0 
Seafood 0.5-5.2 
E ggs (chicken,duck) 1.1-1.4 
Dairy (milk,cheese) 0.4-3.1 
Seeds,nuts 2.9-7.8 
B eans,lentils 1.0-2.0 
Whole-graincereals 0.5-3.2 
Refinedcerealgrains 0.4-0.8 
B read (white flour,yeast) 0.9 
F erm ented cassavaroot 0.7 
Tubers 0.3-0.5 
Vegetables 0.1-0.8 
F ruits 0-0.2 
Source: IZiNCG (2004) 
20.5 Deficiency/Excess 
Zinc deficiency canoccur throughatleastfivemecha nisms -inadequatedietary intake, 
increasedrequirements,malabsorption,increased losses andimpairedutilization.The primary 
cause ofzinc deficiency is inadequateintakethatmay be due to low dietary intakeordependence 
on foods w ithlittle or poorlybioavailable zinc.As zincrequireme ntincreases withgrowthand 
development,infants,children,adolescents,pregnantand lactatingw omen are athighriskof 
zinc deficiency.Other groups atriskof zinc deficiency include elderly,individualswith 
m alabsorptionsyndrome s (Sprue,Crohn’sdiseaseand shortbow elsyndrome),vegetarians 
358 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Zinc 
andinfantswithacrodermatitisenteropathica.Decreasedefficiency ofzincabsorption,increased 
urinary zinclosses,low zincbioavailabilityin diet,geneticdefects to zinc transporter and 
reduced foodintakeattributed topoor appetite and alteredtasteperceptionare causes forzinc 
deficiencycomm only observed intheseat-risk individuals.
Ithasbeen estimatedthat17.3%ofthe world’s populationisatriskofinadequatezinc 
intake.The prevalenceofinadequatezinc intakecouldrangefrom 7.5% inhigh-incom e regions 
to 30% or m ore inregions of South and SoutheastAsia,Sub-SaharanAfrica and Central 
Am erica(Wessels and Brown, 2012).These estimations provide suggestive evidence of 
populations atrisk ofzinc deficiency.Whilesevere zincdeficiency israre,mild-to-moderate 
form s of zincdeficiency m ay be relativelycommo n worldwide.How ever,the detection and 
estimationofprevalence ofm ild-to-moderatezincdeficiency have been difficultdue tothelack 
ofpotentialbiomarkersofzinc statusand specific clinicalfeaturesofzincdeficiency.
Zincdeprivationimpairsgrowth and developmentofinfants,childrenand adolescents. 
Poor grow thand development due tozincdeficiencyhasbeen attributed toitsdepressionon 
appetite.Althoughthere aremultiple causesoflineargrowth retardationinchildren,stunting 
appearstobe one ofthe m ainadverse effectsofzinc deficiency.Zinc deficiency alsocontributes 
tochildm ortality andmo rbiditydue tohighersusceptibilitytomicrobialand parasitic infections 
astheimm une system iscompromi sed (Wesselsand Brown, 2012).Inpopulationsatriskof 
zincdeficiency,zincsupplement ation isreportedto preventgrowth failure,im prove linear 
growth and we ightgainas wellas reduce mortality and mo rbidity due to diarrhoea,low er 
respiratorytractinfection orm alariaamong infantsand childrenin developingcountries (Brow n 
etal., 2009;M ayo-Wilsonetal., 2014;M cDonald etal., 2015;Suchdev et al., 2016).Zinc 
supplementation alsoimproves neurobehavioralfunctionsaswellas affectand m ood ofinfants 
and children(IZiNCG ,2004) 
Pr egnantwomen arevulnerable tolow zincstatusdue totheadditionalzincdema nds 
associatedwithpregnancyand foetaldevelopment.Ithasbeen suggested thatm aternalzinc 
deficiency isassociatedwithadversematernaland foetaloutcome s such aspreterm labour 
and pregnancy induced hypertension,intrauterinegrowth retardation,low birthweight,poor 
neurobehavioraldevelopment and increasedmorbidity inlow birthweightneonates.A recent 
review of 21 randomi zed controltrials (Otaet al., 2015)to assess the effects of zinc 
suppleme ntationinpregnancyon maternal,foetal,neonataland infantoutcom es concluded 
thatzinc suppleme ntationduring pregnancy was notsignificantlyassociatedwithimproved 
maternaland pregnancyoutcomes,exceptforpretermbirth.Howe ver,theobserved reduction 
inpreterm births by zincsupplementationwas primarilyrepresented by trialsinvolvinglow- 
income w omen with higherrisk ofpoor nutritionalstatus. 
Zincexcess isless prevalentthanzincdeficiency.Exc essivezincintakes,through either 
zincsupplement or contactwithenvironmentalzinc,canproduce acuteand chroniceffectsof 
toxicity.N o evidenceofadverseeffectsofintakesofnaturallyoccurringzincinfood hasbeen 
reported. Acuteeffectsofzinc toxicity(200mg zincormore) canproduce m etallictaste,gastric 
distress,dizziness,vomiting,nausea,abdominalcramps andbloody diarrhoea.Chroniceffects 
(100-300m g zinc daily) in adultscan resultin reductionof imm une functions and H DL 
cholesteroland impairmentofcopperstatus.Severeneurologicaldiseasesattributable to copper 
deficiencyarealsoassociatedwithchronic highzincintakes(Hede raetal., 2009). 
359 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Zinc 
20.6 Factorsaffectingzincrequirements 
Dietary factorscanaffecttheproportion ofavailablezincforabsorptionintheintestine 
and consequently zinc requiremen t(IOM, 2006;IZiNC G, 2004;Lonnerdal,2000).There are 
severalm ain dietary factorsinfluencingzinc absorptionand utilization,namely phytate(phytic 
acid),sourceand amount ofproteininame aland calcium.W hilephytateand dietarycalcium 
inhibitzincabsorption,protein enhances absorption.Ph ytateispresentinplantfoods witha 
highcontentinwho legrain cereals,legumes,nuts and seeds and alow contentinfruits,leaves 
and vegetables.As phytatecannotbe digestedorabsorbed,thezincbound tophytate willalso 
pass through the intestine unabsorbed.The inhibitory effectofphytate on zinc absorption 
appears tobe dose-dependent.Fo ods thatarehighinfibre tend tobe phytate-rich,howe verfibre 
itselfisunlikelytonegativelyaffectthezincabsorption. 
The amo untand sourceofprotein influence zinc absorption.As protein contentincreases 
inam eal,agreaterpercentageofzinc isabsorbed.Zincabsorptionfrom adiethighinanim al 
proteinsis greaterthanfrom adiethigh inplantproteins.Otherproteinsources such aswhey 
protein and casein have enhancing and inhibitory effect on zincabsorption,respectively.In 
addition,zinc contentina m ealw illaffectzinc absorption inthatas the contentofzinc ina 
m ealincreases,the fractionalzincabsorptiondecreases.Also,low zincdietswillincreasezinc 
absorptionand retention.
The inhibitory effectofdietarycalcium on zincabsorptionoccurs onlyinthepresence 
of phytate-containing m eals.Calcium ma y interactwith zinc and phytate to form insoluble 
com plexesinthe intestinaltract,thus renderingzincunavailable.A calcium -rich dietor long 
term use of calcium supplements appearsto have no significant inhibitory effecton zinc 
absorptionor status,provided intakeof zinc is adequate.Similarly,the reduced calcium 
absorptionw ithintakeofzincsupplementsisonlyobserved whe n calcium intake is low. 
U nder m ostdietary conditions,interactions ofzincand othernutrientsma y notproduce 
undesirable outcom es.Dietarysources of phosphorous e.g.phytate and phosphorous-rich 
proteins (m ilkcasein),can bind zinc and decrease zinc absorption. H igh dose of iron 
supplements providedsimultaneously withzincsupplementscan reduce zincabsorption.The 
effectofiron on zincwillonly occur when irontozincratioisveryhigh(e.g.25:1).Howe ver, 
iron fortification offoods orlong-term use ofiron suppleme nts does notimpairzinc absorption 
or status.Chronic high zinc intake,particularly through zinc supplementation,could 
com prom isecopper status.The effectofzinc-folate interactionon folateabsorptionhas been 
equivocal.H ow ever,folatesupplementationdoes notappearto have adeleterious effecton zinc 
status. At present,there is no known nutrient-gene interaction that wou ld affectzinc 
requirement.Although severegeneticpolymorphism is responsiblefortheclinicalsyndrome 
ofacroderm atitisenteropathica,theprimary treatment is zincsupplement.
360 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Zinc 
20.7 Settingrequireme nts and recomm ended intakesofzinc
Generalconsiderations
The presentrecomme nded zinc values forMalaysian populationare based essentially 
on the zincintakerecomm endationsofWH O/FAO (2004).The discussionalso consideredthe 
zincintakerecom m endationsby IOM (2001,2006),IZiNCG(2004)and EFSA (2014).
The factorialapproachwas used by IOM (2001,2006),IZiNCG(2004),EFSA (2014)and 
WH O/FAO (2004)asthe basisforcomputing the EAR ofzinc for m ostage and physiologic 
groups.The EAR ofzincistheamount ofzincthatmust be absorbed toma tchtheamount of 
endogenou s zinclosses.The physiologic requirement isthe amo unt of zinc that m ust be 
absorbed tocounterbalancethe sum ofendogenous zinclostthrough allroutes ofexcretion plus 
theam ount ofzincretained in newly accruedtissue(WHO /FAO, 2004).The estimationofzinc 
requiremen tsby thefactorialapproach requirestwo stagesnam ely;firstlythe estimation of 
physiologicalrequirementsandsecond stageisthedeterminationofthequantityofdietaryzinc 
availableforabsorption.
Both intestinaland non-intestinalsources (urine,surface losses ofskin/hair/nail/sweat) 
contributetoendogenous zinclosses.The estimated normativephysiologicalrequirements for 
absorbed zinc inadult men and women areestimatedto be 1.4m g/day and 1.0 mg /day, 
respectivelyby WH O /FA O (2004).E xtrapolations from these values aredone to estimate 
endogenous lossesinchildren (6mont hs to18 years).Inthese growing age groups,therate 
ofaccretion and zinc contentofnewly form ed tissues are also included inthe estimation of 
theirphysiologic requiremen ts.As forpregnancy andlactation,zincretentionduringpregnancy 
and zincconcentrationinhuma n milk atdifferentstagesare also added to the requirem ent 
estimations.
The estimationofphysiologiczincrequireme ntalso requires reference bod y w eightsfor 
various age groups.WH O/FA O (2004)and IZiNCG (2004)haveutilized the NCHS /CDC 1977 
growthreference thatismore applicabletotheinternationalpopulations.IOM (2001),on the 
other hand appliedreferencebody weights which represented those of No rthAmer ican 
population.For the Malaysian RNI,the reference body we ightsofMalaysianpopulation are 
utilisedforallagegroups. 
A summar y ofthedietaryzincabsorptionestimatesused by theWHO/F AO consultation, 
the IOM DR Icommittee and IZiNCG consultationis shown inTable 20.2.The translationof 
estimates of absorbed zinc to dietaryzincrequirement by WHO/ FAO (2004)involved tw o 
considerations.F irst,the contentof promo ters and inhibitors ofzinc absorption inthe diet 
determines the fraction ofdietaryzincthatispotentiallyabsorbable.Second,the efficiency of 
absorptionofpotentially availablezincis inverselyrelatedtozinccontentinthediet.Based on 
these considerations and other datafrom zincabsorptionstudies,three categories ofdiets 
(high,moderate and low zinc bio-availability)withtheirrespective fractionalabsorptionrates 
(50%,30% and 15%)we re identified. For categorizingdiets according to theirpotential 
bioavailabilityofzinc,thefollowingcriteriawere used: 
361 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Zinc 
(i). H ighzinc bioavailability 
The dietconsists ofrefined foodslow in cerealfibre,phyticacid contentand phytate-zinc 
m olarratio< 5;hasnon-plantsourcesofzincsuch asm eats,fish,certainseafoodand 
poultry. 
(ii). Moderate zincbioavailability 
Mixed dietw ithanimalorfishprotein;lacto-ovo,ovo-vegetarian orvegandietsnotbased 
prim arily on unrefinedcereals or high-extraction-rateflours;therangeofphytate-zinc 
m olarratio is5-15or not exceeding10ifmore than 50%oftheenergy intake isfrom 
unfermented,unrefined cerealsand flours. 
(iii). Low zincbioavailability 
The diet consists of high unrefined,unfermented and ungerminated cereals with 
fortification ofinorganiccalcium salts(> 1 g Ca 2+ /day)and negligible intake ofanimal 
food sources;the diet includes high-phytate soy-protein,cereal(wheat,rice,maize, 
oatmeal,m illet),legume and lentilproducts. 
The TechnicalSub-Commit tee(TSC)on Mineralsand Trace Elements w as oftheopinion 
thatthe generaldietofthe Malaysian populationisclosertothatdescribedform oderate 
zincbioavailability.Thus,the TSC recom me nded adopting the W HO/ FAO (2004)zinc 
values ofdietw ithzinc absorption of30% (mode ratebioavailability).
Recom mended intakesby age groups 
Upon reviewing available information,the TechnicalSub-Com mittee on M inerals has 
proposed the RNIs forzincforMalaysiaaregiveninboldinthefollowing paragraphs according 
toagegroups and summarised inAppendix 20.1.
Infants (0 -5 m onths) 
No functionalcriteria ofzinc status have been dem onstrated thatreflectresponse to 
dietary intake in infants.Inrelation tobody weight,childrenappeartohave largerlosses ofzinc 
than adults(E FSA, 2014).The recommended intakesofzincwere based on observed m ean 
zincintakeofinfantsexclusively fedhuman milk.IOM (2006)based itsadequateintake(AI)on 
theaverageamoun tofzinctransferinbreastmilkfrom 0-5months post-partum.Thus,anAI 
of2.0m g/day(2.5m g/lx 0.78l/day)isproposed forinfantsinthisage group.IZiNCG (2004) 
concluded thatthe amount ofzincfrom breastmilkisadequate fortheexclusivelybreastfed, 
normalbirth-weightterm infants up to6 months ofage.Consequently,IZiNCG setthe AIofzinc 
362 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Zinc 
Table 20.2:Estimateddietaryzincabsorptionby WHO/FAO (2004),IOM (2001) and IZiNCG (2004) 
WHO/F A O IOM IZiNC G 
Diettypes Highly Mixed/, Unrefinedc M ixed;semi- M ixed, Unrefined, 
represented refineda Refined purified; R efined cereal-based 
vegetarianb EDTA -washed vegetarian 
soy protein 
Studytype Singlemeal and totaldiet Totaldiet Totaldiet 
Subjects NA d NA NA M en 19-50 Men and wome n 20+years 
Years 
P hytate: < 5 5– 15 > 15 NA 4 – 18 > 18 
zincmolarratio 
Zinc 50% 30% 15% 41% 26% M 18% M 
absorptione 34% F 25% F 
a Refineddietslow incerealfibreand animalfoodsprovidetheprinciplesourceofprotein.Includessemi-purified 
formuladiets 
b Mixed dietsand lacto-ovo-vegetariandietsthatarenotbased on unrefinedcerealgrainsor highextractionrate(> 
90%) flours. 
c Cereal-baseddietswith> 50%ofenergyintakefrom unrefinedcerealgrainsor legumes and negligibleanimal 
proteinintake. 
d NA=not available 
e Criticallevelofzincabsorptionor levelofzincintakesarejustsufficienttomeet physiologicrequirementsfor 
absorbedzinc 
Source:IZiNCG(2004) 
363 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Zinc 
from breastmilkas1.64mg /day (2.3m g/lx 0.714 l/day)for0-2mo nths and 1.06 mg/day(1.35 
m g/lx 0.784L/day)for3-5months.EFSA (2014)estimatedphysiologicalzincrequirement for 
infants aged 7 to11m onths as0.73m g/day,whereby theaveragerequirement (AR) forinfants 
as 2.4m g/day.Due to no referencebod y weights and no knowledge on the variation in 
requirement,thepopulation requirement intake (P R I)forinfants was estimatedat2.9m g/day 
(CV of10%) 
W HO/F AO (2004)estimated the physiologic requirement of this age group by 
extrapolatingfrom me tabolicratedataforadults and adding thezinccontentinnewlydeposited 
tissues. In huma n-milk fed infants,the endogenous zinc losses were assum ed to be 20 
µg/kg/daywhilethatofinfants fed formu laor w eaningfoods was 40 µg/kg/day.F or infant 
growth,estimated zinc increases were setat120and 140µg/kg/day forfemaleand maleinfants 
respectivelyforthe first3m onths.The recomme nded zincintakes are based on thesources of 
m ilk,assumingthathuman milk hasthehighestzincbioavailabilityfollowed by amix ofwhe y 
adjusted m ilkform ulaand partlyhum an-milkorlow-phytatefood supplements w ith otherliquid 
m ilks(moderate bioavailability)andphytate-richvegetableproteinbased formula(soy)w ithor 
w ithoutwhole grain cereals(low bioavailability).
For the Malaysian RN I,the TSC forMineralsand TraceElemen ts recom men ds zinc 
intakes to be based on sources ofmilk with the highest(human m ilk)and m oderate(infant 
form ula)bioavailabilitylevelsof80% and 30% (WHO/FA O,2004),respectively.
RNI forinfants 
0 -5 m onths Breastfed 1.1 m g/day
Formula fed 2.8m g/day 
Infants (6 -11 m onths) 
To obtain theestimated averagerequirement(EA R) for infantsof6-11 months ofage, 
IOM (2001)and IZiNCG (2004)haveutilizedthesame fractionalzincabsorptionfrom huma n 
m ilkas50%.The amount ofabsorbedzinc required from complementaryfoodsisdetermined 
asadifference between therequiredabsorbed zincand theam ount ofzincingested from the 
milk.The E AR for infants(breastfedand non-breastfed) is then calculatedastheamount of 
zincfrom hum anmilkplus theamount ofzinc from comp leme ntary foods,assuming fractional 
absorptionofzincis 30% from com plementary foods.By 7 and 12 months ofage,huma n milk 
providesonly0.5mg zinc/dayand 0.39 m g zinc/day,respectively.The NHANES IIIdataindicated 
thatthe m edianzinc intakefrom com plem entaryfoods is1.48 m g/day for older infants 
consum inghum an milk.EFSA (2014)estimated theendogenous faecalzinclossforthisage 
group as 0.34mg/day and urine lossas 0.05m g/day,wh ichwere extrapolated from adult 
values.
WH O /FAO (2004)estimated thephysiologiczincrequireme ntforthisage group based 
on extrapolationsfrom thedataused toestimatetheendogenous zinclosses inadults. Thus, 
an average loss of0.57µg/basalkcalw asderived forthisage group.The estimated zincincrease 
for this age group was setat33µg/kg/day.Different physiologic requirem ents (µg/kgbody 
w eight/day)were setfor differentlevelsofzincbioavailability.
364 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Zinc 
Fo rthe Malaysian RNI,assum ingthatinfantsinthis age group arealready supplemented 
with dietsof m oderate zincbioavailability,the physiologic requiremen t for zinc isset at 
0.311mg/kgbody weight/dayasrecommended by WHO/FAO (2004).Thus,therecom mended 
nutrientintakebased on thereference body w eightisasper below.
RN I forinfants 
Boys 
6 -11 m onths 4.1mg/day 
Girls 
6 -11 m onths 3.7 mg/day 
Children and adolescents 
IOM (2001)andIZiN CG (2004)calculated the endogenous zinc lossesandamountofzinc 
required for growthforchildreninthisagegroup as0.034mg/kg body w eight/day and 0.020 
mg/g oftissuegained,respectively.An additional0.1mg /day w as included intheestim ated 
physiologicrequirements formale and female adolescents14-18 yearsto account for zinc 
lossesinthe semen and m enses as w ellas zinc required forsynthesisofnew tissue forgrowth. 
These valuesfor endogenous losses and zinc requiredfor growth are then multiplied 
respectively by thereference body weightandthe expectedrate ofweightgainforthe respective 
agegroups.InEFSA (2014),theestimation ofphysiologicalzincrequireme ntforchildren and 
adolescentwere presentedin addition withaveragerequirement(AR).
WHO/ FAO (2004)estimated the physiologiczinc requirement of thisage group by 
extrapolating from estimationson endogenous losses inadults.Similartoinfants6-11mo nths, 
anaveragelossof0.57µg/basalkcalwas utilized.For 1-10yearsofage,growth requirements 
were based on the assumptionthatnew tissuecontains30 µg/g (0.030mg/g)zinc.Du ring 
adolescence,a zinccontentof23 µg/g(0.023mg/g)increaseinbody weightwas assumed. 
WH O /FAO consultationdid notinclude zincloss insemen.
Differentphysiologicrequirements (ug/kgbody w eight/day)we resetfordifferentlevels 
ofzinc bioavailability.Assuming Malaysianmixed-diettohavemoderatezinc bioavailability,the 
physiologicrequirements forzincforthe various agegroupsareestimatedasfollows:1-3year 
(0.230 m g/kg body we ight/day);4-6 year (0.19 0 mg/kg bod y w eight/day);7-9 year (0.149 
mg /kg body weight/day);10-12 years (M),0.140(mg/day);10-12years(F)0.119(m g/day);13- 
15years (M),0.125(mg/day);13-15years(F),0.111(mg/day),and 16-18(M),0.111m g/day; 
16-18(F),0.102(mg /day).Using these age-specificphysiologic requirements andthereference 
body w eightsofM alaysian childrenand adolescent,the proposed Malaysian RNIs ofzincare 
asbelow: 
365 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Zinc 
RNI forchildren 
Boys 
1 -3 years 4.2m g/day 
4 -6 years 5.2m g/day
7 -9 years 5.7m g/day 
G irls 
1 -3 years 4.0 m g/day 
4 -6 years 5.2m g/day 
7 -9 years 5.6 m g/day 
RNI foradolescents 
Boys 
10-12 7.0 mg/day 
13-15 9.3 mg/day 
16-18 9.9 mg/day 
G irls 
10-12 6.3 mg/day 
13-15 7.7mg/day 
16-18 7.7mg/day 
Adults 
The estimationofphysiologicalrequiremen tsforabsorbed zinc in adultm en and women 
by WHO/ FA O (2004),IOM (2001),IZiNCG (2004)and E FSA (2014)were considered.Total 
endogenous lossesformen and women differed among the three committees withthevalues 
setby IZiNC G (M -2.69m g/day;F -1.86mg/day)intermediate to thelow valuesproposed by 
W HO/F AO (M -1.4m g/day;F -1.0m g/day)and the high levels ofIOM (M -3.84 mg /day;F -3.30 
m g/day).For most estimationofintestinaland non-intestinalendogenous zinclosses,IZiNCG 
(2004)and IOM utilized asimilarconceptualapproach.F or example,whileW H O/FAO (2004) 
didnotincludezinclossin semen and estimatedintestinallossofendogenous zincbased on 
the results from one study,IZiNCG (2004)and IOM (2001)included zincloss insemen and 
reviewed a larger number of studies to estimate intestinallossof endogenous zinc.The 
differences in the calculation of totalendogenous losses for men and wo men by these 
com mittees resultedin differentestimates ofaveragerequirementforzincand theconsequent 
recom men ded intakeof zinc.InEFS A (2014),the recom men ded dailyallowances of zinc 
requirement foradultswere estimated withdifferentlevelsofphytateintake name ly300,600, 
900 and 1200m g/day. 
366 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Zinc 
The requirements forthe elderly(>65years)are estimated inthesame w ayas thosefor 
otheradults.A higherrequirement m aybe necessaryfortheelderlydue tolowerefficiency of 
zincabsorption.On theotherhand,endogenous lossesseem to be lowerinthe elderly.He nce, 
theW H O /FAO consultation had recommended thesame intakes for theelderlyand theother 
adults.
The TSC forMineralsand TraceElements recomme nded thattheM alaysian RNI ofzinc 
form en and w om en be based on the approachof WHO/ FAO (2004) and the physiologic 
requirementsfordiets with moderate zinc bioavailability form en and wo men were 0.072 mg/kg 
body weight/dayand 0.059m g/kgbody weight/day,respectively.
RN I foradults 
Men 
19-29 years 6.6 mg/day 
30-59 years 6.5 mg/day 
60-64 years 6.3 mg/day 
> 65 years 6.2 mg/day 
Women 
19-29 years 4.7mg/day 
30-59 years 4.6 mg/day 
60-64 years 4.4mg/day 
> 65 years 4.3 mg/day 
Pregnancy and Lactation 
Physiologiczincrequirement increasesduringpregnancy due to accrualoffoetaland 
maternaltissues.For this purpose,IOM (2001)estimatedadditionalzincrequirements of0.16 
mg/dayforthefirsttrimester,0.39mg/dayforthesecond trimesterand 0.63m g/dayforthird 
trimester.EFS A (2014)estimated an additionalvalueof 1.6m g/day for all trimesters of 
pregnancyand 2.9m g/dayforlactation.WHO /FAO (2004)providedestimatesof0.10m g/day 
forfirsttrimester,0.30mg/dayforsecond trimesterand0.70mg/dayforthirdtrimester.IZiNCG 
(2004)proposed 0.7mg/dayasadditionalzinc requirementforalltrimestersofpregnancy that 
may overestimate the average requirem entsforabsorbedzincinthefirstandsecond trime sters. 
Thisamount shouldbe added totheage-specificrequirementforabsorbed zincofadolescents 
or adultwom en.
The am ount ofzinc transferredfrom mother toinfantinhuman milkmust be added to 
thephysiologicrequirementforabsorbed zincinlactatingwome n. IOM (2001)proposed an 
estimateof1.35m g/dayasanaverageadditionalamount ofabsorbed zincrequired forlactation, 
afterdiscountingapproximately1 m g/dayofendogenous zinc(accumu latedduring pregnancy) 
for the firstm onth ofpostpartum.Using a similarapproachasIOM (2001),IZiNCG (2004) 
proposed anadditionalamount ofabsorbedzinc as1.0mg/daythroughoutlactationbased on 
367 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Zinc 
the age-specificaveragemilkvolume transferred totheinfantsand thezincconcentrationsin 
hum an m ilk.This amount shouldbe added totheage-specificrequireme ntforabsorbed zinc 
ofadolescents or adultwomen.
WH O /FAO (2004)estimated zincconcentrations inhuman milkas 2 -3m g/lat1 mont h, 
0.9mg/lat3 months and 0.7mg/lat4 months. Based on this,theconsultationestimatedthe 
average additionalzinc am ounts during the firstyearof post-partum as 1.4 m g/day (0-3 
m onths),0.8mg/day(3-6m onths)and 0.5mg/day (> 6 months).
The TSC for Mineralsand Trace E leme nts decided to adopt the additionalamount s of 
zincrecom mended by WH O /FAO (2004)forpregnancy and lactation. The proposed Malaysian 
R N Iofzinc,based on dietsofm oderatezincbioavailabilityisas follows.
RNI forpregnancy 
1st trimester 5.5 mg/day
2nd trimester 7.0 mg/day 
3rd trimester 10.0 mg/day 
RNI forlactation 
0 -3 m onths 9.5 mg/day 
4 -6 m onths 8.8mg/day 
7 -12 m onths 7.2mg/day 
D iscussion on revised RNI forMal aysia 
The inclusionofzinc into theRN IforMalaysiaisjustifieddue to its importantrole in 
hum anhealthand nutrition.The estimateofzincrequirementisrequiredto obtainthe obligatory 
losses andabsorption forgrowth,pregnancy,orlactation.Nevertheless,discrepanciesbetween 
fourexpertcommi tteesexistdue toreference body w eights used,studiesselected,approaches 
to estimate endoge nous faecalzinc(EFZ ) losses,the adjustmen ts in deriving dietaryzinc 
requirem entsand so forth.The differentapproaches inestimating physiologic zincrequirement 
and dietary zincabsorption among WH O/FAO (2004),IOM (2001,2006),IZiNCG(2004)and 
E FSA (2014)resultedinsimilarrecomme nded zincvalues by IOM andIZiNCG,wh icharerather 
differentfrom thoserecommended by WHO/F AO. The EFS A recommende d valuesareslightly 
highercom pared tothe otherexpertcom m ittees (App endix21.1).E FSA isthe onlyexpertgroup 
thatsetdietary recommendation based on dietary phytateforadults compared tootherexpert 
com mittees (W HO ,IOM and IZiNC G ).Itisknown thatphytate impacts zinc requirement, 
therefore,EFSA adopted tri-variatemod elof Miller et al(2007)to examine the relationship 
between totalabsorbedzinc,totaldietaryzincand thedietary phytatecontent.
F rom birthuntilearlyadolescence,therecomm ended zincvaluessetby IOM andIZiNCG 
tend to liebetw een the moderate to high zinc bioavailability values of WHO/ FAO. During 
adolescence,adulthood,pregnancyandlactation,thevalues ofIOM and IZiNCG arebetween the 
low to m oderate zinc bioavailability values of WHO /FAO , however, E FSA values were 
com parativelyhigherthanothers.
368 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Zinc 
The MalaysianRN Iis based on theapproach by W HO /FAO fordietswithmoder atezinc 
bioavailabilitybutadjustedaccordingtothelocalreferencebody weights.Itisnotedthatforthe 
same age groups (>10years,males and females),the RNI values arelower than those in 
WH O /FAO due to thelower referencebody weightsofM alaysians. 
20.8 Tolerable upper intakelevels 
The tolerableupper intakelevelsforzinc asproposed by W HO/F AO (2004),IOM (2006) 
and IZiNCG (2004)isshow n inTable20.3.The WH O/FAO (2004)settheupper levelofzinc 
intake foranadultm anat45mg/day.This levelwas thenextrapolated toothergroups inrelation 
tobasalm etabolicrate.For children,thisresulted inan upperlimitofintake of23-28mg/day. 
IOM (2001,2006)based theupper intakelevelfor adultson 60mg zinc/day,which was then 
extrapolatedto 40mg/day.For children,upper intakelevelwas estimated based on astudyof 
infants fed zinc-fortified infantformula or unfortified infant form ula.The value w as then 
extrapolatedto olderinfantsandchildrenbasedon body weight.IZiNCG (2004)adoptedtheIOM 
valueforupper intakelevelforadults but did not setupper intake levelforchildren.Instead 
IZiNCG estimatedno adverseeffectlevel(N OAEL) valuesfor children based on an Indonesia 
studyofzincsupplementationforinfants.EFSA (2014)hasnotsetUL foranylife-stagegroup 
but reported UL valuesbased on therecommendations oftheSCF (ScientificCommittee on 
Fo od,2006.The SCF setanupperlevelof25m g/day foradults,includingpregnantand lactating 
wom en.For children (1-17yearsold),the upper levelofzinc intake w asextrapolatedfrom that 
ofadults usingbody weightto thepower of0.75and reference body weights forEur opean 
children thatyieldan upper limit of7-22mg/day.The TSC forMinerals and Trace E lem ents 
recom mended thatthetolerableupper intakelevels forzincforMalaysianpopulationbe based 
on theapproachofWHO /FAO (2004). 
Table20.3:Tolerable Uppe rIntake Level(UL)forzinc according to age groups by WHO/ FAO (2004), 
IOM (2006) and IZiNCG (2004) 
FAO /WHO (2004) 
Age, Sex 
Upper 
Lim it 
(mg/day) 
Age, Sex 
Upper 
Limit 
(mg/day) 
Age, Sex 
Upper 
Lim it 
(mg/day) 
IOM (2006) IZiNCG (2004) 
0-6 m onths - 0-6months 4 0-6 mont hs -
7-12 m onth 13 7-12months 5 6-11 mont hs 6
1-3 years 23 1-3years 7 1-3 years 8
4-6 years 23 4-8years 12 4-8 years 14 
7-9 years 28 
10-12years,M 34 9-13years 23 9-13years 26 
10-12years,F 32 
12-15years,M 40 
12-15years,F 36 
15-18years,M 48 14-18years,M 34 14-18 years,M 44 
15-18years,F 38 14-18years,F 34 14-18 years,F 39 
18-60+years,M 45 > 19 years,M 40 > 90 years,M 40 
18-60+years,F 35 > 19 years,M 40 > 90 years,M 40 
Source: Gibson,King& Low e (2016) 
369 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Zinc 
20.9 Researchrecommendations 
The followingpriorityareasofresearch arerecommend ed:
• Estimation of zincrequirement using radio or stable isotopes in differentage and 
physiologicalgroups. 
• Identificationofpotentialbiomarkersofzinc status. 
• Assessment ofzincstatusand dietaryzincintakes ofpopulation groups atrisk ofzinc 
deficiency. 
• Assessment ofpossible outcomes ofzincdeficiency (e.g.growth retardation,impaired 
immune status,pregnancyoutcomes). 
• Determinationofzinccontentand bioavailability oftypicalmixed dietsofvariousethnic 
and socioeconomic groups 
• Investigation oftheeffectsofzincsupplementationsinspecificpopulationgroups e.g. 
infants,young children,pregnantwom en and elderly. 
370 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Zinc 
20.10 References 
Br own KH ,Peerson JM,Baker SK & Hess SY (2009).Preventive zincsupplementationamong 
infants,pre-schoolersand older prepubertalchildren.Fd N utrBull 30:S12-S40 
European Food SafetyAuthority(EFSA) (2014).Scientificopinionon Dietary Referencevalues 
forzinc.EFS A P anelon Dietetic Products,Nutritionand Allergies(NDA ).EFSA J 12(10): 
3844,1-76. 
Gibson RS,King JC & Low e N (2016).A Review ofDietaryZincRecom m endations.Fd NutrBull. 
0379572116652252doi: 10.1177/0379572116652252 
Heder aP ,PeltierA,Fink JK,WilcockS,London Z & B rewer GJ (2009).My elopolyneuropathy 
and pancytopeniadue tocopper deficiency and highzinclevelsofunknow n origin-The 
denture cream isaprimary source ofexcessive zinc.Neu rotoxicology 30:996-999. 
InstituteofMedicine(IOM) (2006).Zinc.In:DietaryReferenceIntakes:The EssentialG uide to 
Nu trientRequirem ents. OttenJJ,H ellwig JP & M eyers,LD (eds).NationalAcademy of 
Sciences,Washington;pp 402-413. 
InstituteofM edicine(IOM) (2001).Zinc.In:DietaryReferenceIntakes for VitaminA, Vitamin 
K, Arsenic,Boron, Chromium, Copper,Iodine,Iron,Man ganese,Mo lybdenum, N ickel, 
Silicon,Vanadium, and Zinc. NationalAcademy P ress,Wa shingtonDC; pp 442-501. 
IZiNCG (2004).Assessm ent ofthe riskofzincdeficiencyinpopulationsand options for its 
control.InternationalZincN utritionConsultativeGroup TechnicalDocument #1. Food 
Nu trBull25(1):94S-203S. 
King JC & Cousins R (2014).Zinc.In: Modern Nutritionin Health and Disease. Ros s AC, 
CaballeroB, Cousins RJ,TuckerKL and ZieglerTR (Eds ).LippincottWilliams& Wilkins, 
Philadelphia;pp189-205. 
LonnerdalB (2000).Dietaryfactorsinfluencing zincabsorption.J Nu tr130:1378S-1383S. 
Mayo-WilsonE,JuniorJA,Imdad A,DeanS,ChanX HS,ChanES,JaswalA & BhuttaZA (2014). 
Zincsupplementation forpreventingmortality,morbidity and growth failure inchildren 
aged 6 mon thsto12 yearsofage.Co chrane D atabase ofSystematicR eviews CD009384 
(5).DO I:10.1002/14651858.CD009384.pub2. 
McD onaldCM ,ManjiKP ,Kisenge R,Aboud S,SpiegelmanD,FawziWW & Dugan CP (2015). 
Dailyzinc butnotmultivitaminsupplementationreduces diarrheaand upper respiratory 
infections inTanzanianinfants:A randomized double-blind,placebo-controlled clinical 
trial.J Nutr 145(9):2153-2160. 
MillerLV,Krebs NF & Ham bidge KM (2000).Developmen tofacomp artmentalmo delofhum an 
zincm etabolism: identifiabilityand multiplestudies analyses.Am J Physiology 279: 
R1671-1684. 
371 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Zinc 
M illerLV,KrebsN F,Ham bidgeKM (2007).A m athematicalmodel ofzincabsorptioninhuma ns 
asafunctionofdietaryzinc and phytate. J Nu tr137(1):135-141.
O taE ,Mo riR, Middleton P ,Tobe-GaiR ,Mahome d K,M iyazakiC & B hutta ZA (2015).Zinc 
supplementationforimproving pregnancy and infantoutcome. Coch rane Database of 
System atic Reviews CD 000230(2).DO I:10.1002/14651858.CD000230.pub5. 
SCF (ScientificComm ittee on Food) (2006).Tolerable upper intake levelsfor vitamins and 
m inerals.European Food SafetyAuthority,Eur opean Commiss ion;pp191-201. 
Suchdev PS ,Addo OY,M artorellR ,GrantFKE, Ruth LJ,P atelMK ,Juliao PC ,Quick R & Flores- 
AyalaR (2016).E ffectsofcommu nity-based salesofm icronutrientpow ders on m orbidity 
episodes inpreschoolchildren inWestern Kenya.Am J ClinNu tr 103(3):934-941. 
WessellsKR & B rown KH (2012).Estimating theglobalprevalenceofzincdeficiency: Res ults 
based on zinc availabilityin nationalfoodsuppliesand theprevalence ofstunting. PLo S 
O N E 7(1 1):e50568 DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.005 05 68. 
W HO /FAO (2004).Zinc.In: Vitamin and MineralR equirements inH um an N utrition. 2nd ed. 
R eportofaJointFA O/WHO Expert Consultation.Bangkok,Thailand;pp 230-243. 
372 Recom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Zinc 
A ge 
group 
RNI 
(m g/day) 
M oderatebio- 
availability 
A ge 
group 
RNI 
(m g/day) 
A ge 
group 
RNI (m g/day) 
Highbio- 
availability 
M oderatebio- 
availability 
Low bio- 
availability 
A ge 
group 
A l 
(m g/day) 
A ge 
group 
A l 
(m g/day) A ge 
group 
A l 
(m g/day) 
PRI 
(m g/day) 
M alaysia (20 17) M alaysia (20 0 5) W H O/FA O (20 0 4) IOM (20 0 1) IZiNC G (20 0 4) EFSA (20 14) 
A ppendix 20 .1 C om parison ofrecom m ended intake forZinc:RNI M alaysia (20 17),RNI ofW H O/FA O (20 0 4),RDA ofIOM (20 0 0 ),IZiNC G (20 0 4) 
and EFSA (20 14) 
Infants Infants Infants Infants Infants Infants 
0-5m ths 1.1 (B F ) 0-5m ths 1.1 (B F ) 0-5m ths 1.1 (B F ) 2.8 (F F ) 6.6 (F F ) 0-6 m ths 2 0-2 m onths 1.64 7-11 m ths 2.9 
2.8 (F F ) 
Boys (m th) Boys (m th) 6-12 m ths 0.8 (F F ) 4.1 8.3 3-5m onths 1.06 
6-11 4.1 6-11 3.7 2.5* 
G irls (m th) G irls (m th) 
6-11 3.7 6-11 3.7 RDA RDA 
(m g/day) (m g/day) 
M ixed or U nrefined,
refined cereal- 
vegetarian based
diets diets 
7-12 m ths 3 6-11 m ths 4 5
C hildren C hildren C hildren C hildren C hildren C hildren 
Boys Boys 1-3years 2.4 4.1 8.4 1-3years 3 1-3years 3 3 1-3years 4.3 
1-3years 4.2 1-3years 4.1 4-6 years 3.1 5.1 10.3 4-8 years 5 4-8 years 4 5 4-6 years 5.5 
4-6 years 5.2 4-6 years 5.1 7-9 years 3.3 5.6 11.3 9 -13years 6 9 7-10years 7.4 
7-9 years 5.7 7-9 years 5.8 
G irls G irls 
1-3years 4 1-3years 4.1 
4-6 years 5.2 4-6 years 5.1 
7-9 years 5.6 7-9 years 5.8 
Boys Boys Boys Boys Boys Boys 
10-12 years 7 10-12 years 9 .0 10-18 years 5.7 9 .7 19 .2 9 -13years 8 14-18 years 10 14 11-14 years 9 .4 
13-15years 9 .3 13-15years 9 .0 14-18 years 11 15-17 years 12.5 
16-18 years 9 .9 16-18 years 9 .0 
373 Recommended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Zinc 
A ge 
group 
RNI 
(m g/day) 
M oderatebio- 
availability 
A ge 
group 
RNI 
(m g/day) 
A ge 
group 
RNI (m g/day) 
Highbio- 
availability 
M oderatebio- 
availability 
Low bio- 
availability 
A ge 
group 
A l 
(m g/day) 
A ge 
group 
A l 
(m g/day) A ge 
group 
A l 
(m g/day) 
PRI 
(m g/day) 
M alaysia (20 17) M alaysia (20 0 5) W H O/FA O (20 0 4) IOM (20 0 1) IZiNC G (20 0 4) EFSA (20 14) 
G irls G irls G irls G irls G irls G irls 
10-12 years 6.3 10-12 years 7.5 10-18 years 4.6 7.8 15.5 9 -13years 8 14-18 years 9 11 11-14 years 9 .4 
13-15years 7.7 13-15years 7.5 14-18 years 9 15-17 years 10.4 
16-18 years 7.7 16-18 years 7.5 
M en M en M en M en M en M en 
19 -29 years 6.6 19 -29 years 6.7 19 -65years 4.2 7 14 19 -30years 11 > 19 years 13 19 > 18 years 300 9 .4 
30-59 6.5 30-59 6.7 >65years 4.2 7 14 31-50years 11 600 11.7 
60-64 6.3 60-64 6.7 51-70years 9 00 14 
>65 6.2 >65 6.2 > 70years 1200 16.3 
W om en W om en W om en W om en W om en W om en 
19 -29 years 4.7 19 -29 years 4.9 19 -65years 3 4.9 9 .8 19 -30years 8 > 19 years 8 9 > 18 years 300 7.5 
30-59 4.6 30-59 4.9 >65years 3 4.9 9 .8 31-50years 8 600 9 .3 
60-64 4.4 60-64 4.9 51-70years 8 9 00 11 
>65 4.3 >65 4.3 > 70years 8 1200 12.7 
Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy** Pregnancy Pregnancy 
1sttrim ester 5.5 1sttrim ester 5.5 1sttrim ester 3.4 5.5 11 14-18 years 12 14-18 years 11 15 +1.6 
2ndtrim ester 7 2ndtrim ester 7.0 2ndtrim ester 4.2 7 14 19 -30years 11 > 19 years 10 13 13 
3rdtrim ester 10 3rdtrim ester 10.0 3rdtrim ester 6 10 20 31-50years 11 
Lactation Lactation Lactation Lactation*** Lactation Lactation 
0-3m onths 9 .5 0-3m onths 9 .5 0-3m onths 5.8 9 .5 19 14-18 years 13 14-18 years 10 11 +2.9 
4-6 m onths 8.8 4-6 m onths 8.8 4-6 m onths 5.3 8.8 17.5 19 -30years 12 > 19 years 9 10 
7-12 m onths 7.2 7-12 m onths 7.2 7-12 m ths 4.3 7.2 14.4 31-50years 12 
B F =breastfed F F =form ulafed 
* – notapplicable to infants consum ing hum an m ilk only 
** – throughoutthe 1st,2nd and 3rd trim esters 
*** – throughoutthe firstyearofpost-partum 
374 R ecom mended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
21 • Selenium 
21.1 Introduction
Selenium,a tracem ineralfound ma inlyinthe soil,has received muc h attention inhuma n 
nutritioninthe lastfew decades due tobetterunderstanding ofitsroleinhuman healthand 
disease.Itsessentialityw as firstobserved infarm animals and laterinhumans when selenium- 
responsivediseaseswere attributedtothemigrationofthenutrientfrom thesoilto thefood 
chain.Inthe diet,the organiccompounds ofselenium(seleno-methionine and seleno-cysteine) 
predom inatewith lesseram ountsin inorganic compounds (selenateand selenite).While there 
isa variationinselenium contentofnormal adulthumans dependingon geographiclocation, 
generally selenium body contentis distributed in skeletalmus cle (30-50%),bones (15%), 
plasma (10%),liver(8%),kidneys (3%)and brain(3%)(Zacharaetal. ,2001).
21.2 Functions 
Selenium from plantand animalfoodsourcesisabsorbed intheintestinewithselenium 
intheform oforganiccompounds ismore efficientlyabsorbed thaninorganiccompounds. In 
theforms ofselenomethionineand selenocysteine,more than 90% ofseleniumisestimatedto 
be efficientlyabsorbed.Selenateand selenite,two inorganicforms ofselenium,have roughly 
equivalent bioavailability which generally exceeds 50%. M ost dietary selenium is highly 
bioavailable(50-80%) withabsorptionefficiency ofseleniumfrom usualdietsisestimatedat 
70%. Howe ver,the absorption efficiency of selenium isnot affectedby selenium statusor 
influencesthehomeostaticregulationofselenium (Sunde,2012).
The physiologicalfunction ofselenium ismainlydue toselenocysteinewhich isintegral 
forthesynthesisofselenoproteins.Selenomethionine,on the otherhand,has a physiological 
functionsimilartomethionineinthatitactsas a substituteform ethionineresidueinproteins. 
Currentlythere are 25 identified selenoproteins inhum ans that are involvedinantioxidant 
activityagainstoxidative damag e and inflammation, T-cellimm unity for protection against 
infections,thyroidhormone metabolism, selenium homeostasis and transport,skeletaland 
cardiacm usclegrowth and function (Mehdi et.al., 2013).
As selenium ispartoftheantioxidantsystem ofthehuma n body,itislikelytointeract 
w ith othernutrientsthatprotectagainstorpromote oxidativedam age to the cells(Sunde,2012). 
21.3 Metabolism
Upon absorption,selenocysteine,selenate and seleniteare availableforthesynthesisof 
selenoproteins,thefunctionalform ofselenium.Selenomethionineisincorporatedintobody 
proteins in organssuch as the skeletalm uscles,red bloodcells,pancreas,liver,kidney,stomach 
and the gastrointestinal mucosa. Selenium from selenomethionine m ay be mob ilized for 
metabolicprocessesthrough conversionofselenomethioninetoselenocysteineinthe liveror 
kidney.Selenoprotein P (SEPP1) appearstoplay a centralroleinthe deliveryofseleniumfrom 
theliver,via the plasma, toothertissues inthe body.Selenium is excreted predom inantlyinthe 
urinew ithotherroutesinclude breath,faecesand breastmilk (EFSA, 2014). 
375 Recommended N utrientIntakes
forMal aysia 
Selenium 
The interaction between selenium and vitamin E is com m only observed in man y 
deficiency diseases inanimals.In hum ans such dataare stilllimited (Hurstetal., 2013)although 
thereismuch interestintheinteractionbetween vitaminE and selenium inrelationtoprevention 
ofprostatecancer,with bothbeing antioxidants (Kristaletal., 2014).O thernutrients thatinteract 
withselenium include iodine forthyroid hormone me tabolism, ascorbic acidforabsorptionand 
me tabolism ofselenium and methionine forbody proteinsynthesisinmethionine-deficientstate 
W HO /FAO (2004).
21.4 Sources
Selenium contentofmany foods,particularlyplantfoodsources,generallydepends on 
environm entalconditions and agriculturalpractices.For plant food sources,thetransfer of 
seleniumfrom thesoiltotheplantsis inﬂuenced by selenium contentofthesoilas we llas soil 
pH,redox potentialand water content.For animal food sources,selenium contentvaries 
accordingto the dietoftheanimals.Table 21.1show s seleniumcontentofselected animaland 
plant food sources.Fish,meat (especially organ meats) eggs,milkand shellﬁsh are good 
sourcesofselenium. Ingeneral,thehighertheproteincontentofa food,themor e seleniumit 
contains.Ot her sources of selenium include water, selenium -enriched foods and food 
supplements.Food processing (e.g.milling) and cooking(e.g.boiling)can contributetoloss 
ofseleniumfrom foods.
Table21.1: Selenium contentoffoods 
Food µg/100g 
M eatand M eatProducts 
Chicken,liver,boiled 100.20 
Beef,liver,boiled 55.80 
M utton,raw,leanand fat 32.20 
Chicken,drumstick,baked,lean 31.10 
Sandw ichesand burgers,roastbeefsandwich withcheese 19.50 
Beef,bladesteak,raw,lean and fat 10 
Satay,beef,frozen 5
Seafoods
Ikan bilis 598.90 
Oyster,raw 69.4 
Prawn,king,cooked 52.9 
Salmon,steamed 46.2 
Kembong raw 10.2 
376 R ecom mended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Selenium 
Sources:Health PromotionBoard (2011)Singapore
Food Selenium (µg/100g edible portion) 
CerealAnd CerealProducts 
Bread roll,wholem eal 11.60 
Cream cracker,w holemeal 4.70 
White ricecooked 4
Egg And Egg Products 
Egg, duck,whole,salted 24.04 
Egg, hen,whole,hard boiled 11 
Nuts And Seeds,Pulses And Products 
Nuts,brazilnuts,dried,unblanched 1917 
Nuts,cashew nuts,oilroasted,withsaltadded 20 
Lentils,dhal,yellow 8.30 
Dietaryintake ofselenium variesaccording topopulationsas factorssuch as selenium 
contentoffoods (i.e.amou ntand typesofseleniumcompou nd),food consum ption patterns (i.e. 
vegetarians)and the geographic originofthefood supply could(i.e.whether itcom es from 
regionsw ithselenium-rich or selenium-poor soils)have profound effecton thisvariability 
(WHO/ FAO, 2004).The m ean per capita/day intakeof selenium of adults inmo stcountries 
(exceptChina)ranged from a low of28 µg/day toa high of220 µg/day (NRC,1989; IOM ,2000). 
Inthe U nitedStates,theoverallmean dietaryselenium intake ofadultsbetw een 1974and 19 82 
wa s 108 µg/day withmea n dailyintake foreach yearrangedfrom 83 µg to129 µg (NRC,1989). 
Ano therstudy in theUS reported selenium intake of81 µg/daywhile a Canadian survey reported 
higherseleniumintakesof113 µg to220µg/day(Harshman and Aldoori,2007).InMalaysia, 
Chinese(94.3+39.7µg)had the highestselenium intakefollowed by theMala ys (83.4+28.9µg) 
and Indians(76.5+33.9µg)(Suzanaetal., 2009). 
21.5 Deficiency/Excess 
The expression and function of seleno-proteins are comp rom ised with selenium 
deficiency.Commo n observed sym ptoms of selenium deficiency inhuma ns include skeletal 
myopa thy,m uscle weakness and cardiomyopathy. Keshan and Keshan-Beck diseases, 
characterized by degeneration oforgansand tissues,areman ifestations ofselenium deficiency 
(Fairw eather-Taitetal., 2011).These conditions areprevalentamo ng children,adolescenceand 
young w omen inselenium-deficientareasorwithlow seleniumintake w ithinChina,Mongolia, 
Siberiaand No rthKorea.Ot her conditions whereby seleniumdeficiency isobserved include 
childrenw ithphenylketonuria(PKU) on a low-proteindietand patientsreceivingselenium-free 
377 Recommended N utrientIntakes
forMal aysia 
Selenium 
totalparenteralnutrition(TPN)(Cabrera.and Barba 2005).Variousseleniumsupplementation 
studies,suggestiveofcorrection ofselenium-deficientstate,have been conducted forprostate 
cancer,cardiovasculardisease,diabetes mellitus,rheumatoid arthritisand Alzheimer disease 
(Loef,.Schrauzer& Wal ach,2011;Stranges.etal.,2007;Kristal etal., 2014).
Excess intakeofdietaryselenium (>1000ug/day)overa longperiodoftimecan lead to 
selenosis,a condition ofchronicexcessofbody selenium .Intakes ofselenium as highas 6690 
ug/day have been reportedinChina where areasare w ith naturallyseleniferous soils (Kuila, 
M ukhopadhyay and Banerje,2012).Characteristicsofselenosisincludeskinrash,headache, 
garlicky breath,toothdecay and discoloration,hairloss,nausea,diarrhoea,fatigue,num bness, 
paralysisand hemiplegia and changes innails(Cabrera and Barba,2005).However,thelevels 
ofdietary exposure consideredexcessive or toxic and can lead to selenosisare difficultto 
establish due toselenium compo unds infoodsand interactions with otherdietary compo nents 
as w ellas genotype (Fairweather-Taitetal., 2011).
A s estimationofselenium intakefrom dietaryassessment isimprecisedue tovariation 
in selenium content of foods,bioma rkersofselenium intake or status becom e essentialin 
hum an healthand disease.These important mar kersof selenium intake,statusor function 
includeplasma /serum and w holeblood selenium concentration,glutathione peroxidase(GPxs ) 
activityin various blood com ponents,plasm a SE PP1 concentration,urinaryselenium excretion, 
selenium concentration inhairand toe nails(Fairweather-Taitetal., 2011).O therpotential 
bioma rkers are ratioof plasma triodothyroxineto thyroxine(T3:T4),plasma thyroxineand 
plasma totalhomocysteine concentration (Ashtonetal., 2009).
21.6 Factorsaffectingselenium requirement
A s dietary selenium, bothorganic and inorganicforms, ishighlybioavailable,selenium 
requirementisless likelyto be affected by selenium bioavailability.Although seleniumma y 
interactw ith vitam inE ,iodine,ascorbicacid,otherantioxidantsand methionine,thescarcityof 
availabledatamay notallow suggestion thatsuch interactionsaffectselenium requireme nt.In 
addition,the presentknowledge on theeffectofselenium-gene interactionon seleniumstatus 
and requirement is limited(EFSA, 2014). 
21.7 Setting Requirements and recommended intakeofselenium 
In Mal aysia,hardlyany nutritionalstudy on thestatusofselenium has been carried out. 
Similarly,dataon selenium contentofMalaysianfoodsare equallylacking.Hence,insetting 
recom men ded intakes for Mal aysians,the TSC on Mi neralshad referredto severalmajor 
publications,namely theWHO /FAO Expert Consultationreportof2004,theDRI Committee of 
IO M (2000)and the WHO /FAO/IAEA (199 6).The rationale and steps taken in setting 
requirements and thelevels recommended by these organizationswere considered.The TSC 
decidedto adaptthe approach and the recomm endationsofWHO/FA O (2004)as therevisedRNI 
forM alaysia,given in bold in the following paragraphs according to age groups and summarized 
inTable21.2. 
378 R ecom mended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Selenium 
Infants 
No functionalcriteria ofselenium statushave been demons tratedthatreflectresponse 
to dietary intake of infants.Thus the IOM (2000)had based the recom men ded intakes of 
selenium on adequateintakethatreflectstheobservedmea n selenium intake of infantsfed 
principallywith breastmilk.A ssuming an average seleniumconcentration of m ilkof w ell- 
nourishedbutunsupplemented motherstobe 18 g/land the average volume ofhuma n milkto 
be 0.78l,the adequateintakeofseleniumforthisage group would be 14µg/day,rounded to 
15 µg by theDRI Commi ttee.Fortheolderinfants,theIOM reporthad computed the adequate 
intakebased on selenium in human m ilk plusthatininfantfoods.The computed intake was 20 
g perday.
A similar approach was taken by WH O/FAO (2004)although the actual intakes 
recommend ed w erelowerthan those ofthe IOM. The Consultation feltthatthe estimates ofRNI 
forinfantsarecompa tiblewith estimatesoftheinternationalreferencerange ofselenium content 
in breast milk (18.5 µg/l)with data from an extensiveinternationalsurvey of breast milk 
seleniumofWHO/F AO /IAEA (1996)and withWHO dataon the milkconsumption ofexclusively 
human- milk-fed infantsin developedand developing countries.Da tafrom theW HO/FAO/IAEA 
(1996) surveyfrom sixcountriessuggestthatthehuman m ilkfrom allcountriesmet theRNI 
forinfantsaged 0-6months. Intwo ofsixcountries,Hungary and Sw eden,thehuman milk 
seleniumw as marginalwithrespectto theRNIforinfantsaged 7-12 months.
The TS C on Minerals had recommended thatintakes forinfants0-5 mont hs and 6-11 
months be calculatedbased on theWHO /FAO (2004)estimated seleniumrequirements of0.85 
µg/kg/dayand 0.91µg/kg/day,respectively,whilstm aking use of the reference we ight for 
Malaysianinfants.
RN IforInfants
Boys
0 - 5 m onths 6 µg/day 
6 -11 m onths 10 µg/day 
Girls
0 - 5 m onths 6 µg/day 
6 -11 m onths 9 µg/day 
Children 
The IOM (2000)found no data thatcould be used to derive an estimated average 
requirem entforselenium forchildrenoradolescents.Inthe absence ofadditionalinformation, 
the requirementsand recom me nded intakes forchildren and adolescentswe re estimated based 
on extrapolation from adultvalues.The requiremen tw as thusbased on the same criteriaof 
adequacy foradults,in thatitwould be expectedtom aximizeplasma glutathioneperoxidase 
activity.
379 Recommended N utrientIntakes
forMal aysia 
Selenium 
In the caseoftheWH O/FA O (2004)consultation,recommende d intakes forchildren were 
calculated basedon thefactors derived from studiesdone in Keshan,China,on thebasisofbody 
w eightand a factortoallow forgrowth.Thus,forchildren 1-3years,4-6 years and 7-9 years, 
the estimated selenium requirements are1.13µg/kg/day,0.92µg/kg/dayand 0.68µg/kg/day, 
respectively.The TSC then used the reference we ight for Ma laysian children to compute the 
RN Iforselenium fortheseage groups.
R N IforChildren 
Boys
1 -3 years 17 µg/day 
4 -6 years 21 µg/day 
7-9 years 22 µg/day 
G irls
1 -3 years 16 µg/day 
4 -6 years 21 µg/day 
7-9 years 21 µg/day 
Adolescents 
The requireme ntforselenium is calculated as inchildrenon thebasisofbody w eightand 
a factor to allowfor growth.Iftheproteinrequireme nt fortheadolescentis adequate,then 
autom aticallythe selenium needs will be m et.Table21.2shows the estimated selenium 
requirements arebased on 0.50µg/kg/dayforma leadolescents10-12years,13-15yearsand 
16-18 years(WH O/FAO, 2004)and the body weightsofadolescentsfrom localdata.Forfemale 
adolescents10-12years,13-15years and 16-18years theestimated selenium requirementsare 
based on 0.42µg/kg/day(WHO/FAO ,2004) and thebody w eights of adolescentsfrom local 
data. 
R N IforAdolescents 
Boys 
10-12 years 21 µg/day 
13-15 years 31 µg/day 
16-18 years 37µg/day 
G irls 
10-12 years 19 µg/day 
13-15 years 24 µg/day 
16-18 years 26 µg/day 
380 R ecom mended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Selenium 
Adultsand elderly 
IOM (2000)had determined theestimatedrequirements forselenium foradultsbased 
on the resultsoftw o interventionstudies thatwere done indifferentcountries butwithsimilar 
designs.The Chinesestudy(Yang etal., 1987) suggests thata plateau ofplasma glutathione 
peroxidaseactivity was reachedwitha selenium intakeof41µg/day.The New Zealandstudy 
(D uffieldet al.,19 99) seem to suggest an estimated requirem ent of 38 µg/day.The DR I 
Commit teetook the average of thesetwo studiesand mad e a we ight adjustmentfor No rth 
Ame ricanma lesand arrived ata requireme ntof45µg/day.The RDA, com puted as 120% ofthe 
requireme nt,is55µg forbothm en and women .Forthe elderlygroup,IOM didnotrecom mend 
foradditionalintakes,noting that the aging process does not appear to im pairselenium 
absorptionorutilization.
Studieshave been conductedwithadultmale subjectsinitiallyoflow selenium status 
givena carefullymonitoreddietproviding seleniumat11 µg/day togetherwithsupplementsof 
seleno-methioninegiven orallywhich provided 0,10,30,60,or 90 µg/day.Startingatfrankly 
deficientlevels,totaldailyselenium intakes ofabove 41µg/day w erefound sufficientto increase 
plasma G SHPx substantially and tosaturateplasma activityin60-kg ma lesubjectswithin5-8 
months.Itw as estimated thatsatisfactorylevelsofplasma selenium and ofGSHPx indicative 
ofadequateselenium reserveswould be attainedafterintakes ofapproximately27 µg/dayby 
65-kgmale subjects(WHO/FAO /IAEA, 1996).Such criteriasatisfyingthedefinitionofaverage 
normativerequirements forselenium was used as the basis for calculating recomm ended 
nutrientintake (RNI)valuesby the FAO /WHO (2004)consultationafterinterpolatingestimates 
ofaverage requirements by allowing fordifferencesinweightand basalme tabolicrateofage 
groups to up to65years.A 25percentincrease(2x assumed SD) w as nextadded toallowfor 
individualvariability intheestimates ofRNI.
Table21.2show s WH O /FAO (2004)estim atedseleniumrequirementforadultme n,19- 
65years ofage is 0.42µg/kg/day,w hile those> 65yearsoldis 0.41µg/kg/day.Foradultwom en 
(19-65 yearsand > 65 years),therequirement issetat0.37µg/kg/day.Thus,using reference 
body w eightsforadultMalaysian men and women respectively,theTS C on Mine ralsand Trace 
Elements had recommended thattheM alaysian RNI for selenium form en and women areas 
follows.
RN Iforadults 
Men
19-29 years 32 µg/day 
30-59 years 32 µg/day 
Women
19-29 years 25 µg/day 
30-59 years 24 µg/day 
381 Recommended N utrientIntakes
forMal aysia 
Selenium 
R N Iforelderly 
M en
60-64 years 31 µg/day 
≥65 years 30 µg/day 
Wom en
60-64 years 23 µg/day 
≥65 years 23 µg/day 
Pregnan cy 
U pon reviewing the literature,IOM (2000) found few studies that could provide 
informa tionon the selenium requiremen ts of pregnant wo m en.However,the pregnancy 
requirem entshould allow accumu lationofenough selenium by thefoetustosaturateitsseleno- 
proteins.Based on an estimated foetaldeposition of 4µg/day throughout pregnancy,the 
estimated requirement is increasedby this amount duringpregnancy.Since most selenium is 
highlybioavailable,no adjustmentforabsorptionisfeltnecessary.
WH O /FA O/IAEA (1996)attemptedtopredicttheincrease ofdietaryseleniumneeded for 
pregnancyby factorialestimation ofthelikely quantityofselenium incorporated intothetissues 
of the foetus.Itw as assumed thatthetotalproductsof conceptionamount to 4.6-6kg lean 
tissuewitha proteincontentofapproximately18.5-20percent.Iftheseleniumcontentofthis 
proteinresemb lesthatofa skeletalmuscle,growth ofthese tissues couldaccountforbetween 
1.0and 4.5µg/day ofselenium.With an assumed absorptionand utilizationrateof80 percent 
dietaryseleniumand allowing fora variabilityofestimates (CV 12.5percent)an increase of2 
µg/day was feltappropriatefor the second trimester and 4µg/day forthethird trimesterof 
pregnancy (WHO/FAO ,2004).
R N Iforpregnancy 
1 sttrimester 25 µg/day 
2nd trimester 27 µg/day 
3rd trimester 29 µg/day 
Lactation 
Based on an estimated human m ilk selenium concentrationofabout18 µg/land a milk 
volume of0.78lperday,theaverage am ountofseleniumsecreted inm ilkwas estimated by the 
D RI comm ittee to be 14µg. Since most selenium in hum an milk is presentas seleno- 
m ethionine,w hich has a bioavailabilityof greaterthan 90 %, no adjustmen t was made for 
absorption.The IOM (2000)hence added 14µg/dayofseleniumtotheestimatedrequirement 
ofnon-pregnantand non-lactatingwomen.
382 R ecom mended NutrientIntakes
forMalaysia 
Selenium 
WHO/ FAO (2004)estimated selenium requirement for lactating wo m en from the 
estimated RNI for infants aged 0-6mont hs and 7-12mont hs.As suming thattheseleniumof 
maternalmilkisused with an efficiency of 80%, an individualvariability of 12.5% and an 
estimated RNIfor0-6m onths as 6 µg/day,the increase inmaternaldietary selenium forthefirst 
6 months oflactationis9 µg/day.U singsimilarcalculations,theincrease indietary selenium 
intakeform onths7-12isrecommended tobe 16 µg/day.
RN IforLactation 
0 -3 m onths 34 µg/day 
4 -6 m onths 34 µg/day 
7-12 m onths 41 µg/day 
Table 21.2:Recom mended NutrientIntakesforSelenium, by age group. 
G roup 
Reference
body w eight a
(kg) 
Averagenorm ative 
requirem ent bb
Se R norma tive 
(kg/day) 
Se R norm ative 
(total/day) 
RNI 
(µg/day) c
Infants 
Boys 
0-5 months 5.8 0.85 4.9 6
6-11 months 8.8 0.91 8 10 
G irls 
0-5 months 5.3 0.85 4.5 6
6-11 months 8.1 0.91 7.4 9
Children 
Boys 
1-3 years 12.2 1.13 13.8 17 
4-6 years 18.3 0.92 16.8 21 
7-9 years 25.4 0.68 17.3 22 
G irls 
1-3 years 11.5 1.13 13 16 
4-6 years 18.2 0.92 16.7 21 
7-9 years 25.0 0.68 17 21 
Adolescents 
Boys 
10-12 years 33.4 0.50 16.7 21 
13-15 years 49.6 0.50 24.8 31 
16-18 years 59.2 0.50 29.6 37 
G irls 
10-12 years 35.4 0.42 14.9 19 
13-15 years 46.5 0.42 19.5 24 
16-18 years 50.3 0.42 21.1 26 
383 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Selenium 
Group 
Reference 
body w eight a
(kg) 
Average normative 
requirem ent bb
Se R norma tive 
(kg/day) 
Se R norma tive 
(total/day) 
R NI 
(µg/day) c
Adults 
M en 
19-29 years 61.4 0.42 25.8 32 
30-59 years 60.6 0.42 25.5 32 
≥60 years 58.1 0.42 24.4 31 
60-64 years 58.5 0.42 24.6 31 
≥65 years 57.7 0.41 23.7 30 
W omen 
19-29 years 52.9 0.37 19.6 25 
30-59 years 52.2 0.37 19.3 24 
≥60 years 49.5 0.37 18.3 23 
60-64 years 50.2 0.37 18.6 23 
≥65 years 48.8 0.37 18.1 23 
Pregnancy 
1st trimester 25 
2nd trimester 27 
3rd trimester 29 
Lactation 
0-3 months 34 
4-6 months 34 
7-12 months 41 
a reference body weights for the Malaysian population 
b derived from WHO/ FAO/ IAEA values by interpolation. 
c recom mended nutrient intake (RNI) derived from the average Se R norm ative + 2 X assume d standard deviation (of 
12.5%). 
21. 8 D iscussion on Comparison of Recomm ended Intake of Selenium 
In general, the recommended selenium intakes for most age groups by IOM (2000) are 
1.5 - 2.0 times more than the values recommend ed by FAO /WHO  (2004). The differences could 
be due to the different approaches in estima ting physiologic selenium requirement by both 
com mittees. The approach used by the Malaysian RNI committee to derive the recomme nded 
selenium intakes is similar to that of FA O/W HO (2004). However, for mos t age groups, the 
Ma laysian RNI values are slightly lower than those in the FAO/ WH O report due to the lower 
reference body weights of Malaysians (Table 21.2). 
384 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Selenium 
21.9 Tolerable Upper Intake Levels 
The tolerable upper intake level (UL) for various age groups as suggested by IOM  (2000) 
are given in Table 21.3.  WHO/FAO (2004) has also proposed a UL of 400 µg/day for adults but 
the UL for children and for pregnant or lactating women has yet to be determined. The Eur opean 
Commi ssion (2000) adopted a UL of 300 ug/day for adults including pregnant and lactating 
wom en and extrapolated the UL of adults to children based on reference body weights. 
Table 21.3 Tolerable Upper Intake Level for selenium ac cording to age group 
Age groups µg/day of selenium 
Infants 
0-6 months 45 
7-11 months 60 
Children 
1-3 years 90 
4-8 years 150 
9-13 years 280 
A dolescents 14 – 18 years 400 
A dult women ≥19 years 400 
A dult men ≥ 19 years 400 
Pregnant women 
14-18 years 400 
19-50 years 400 
Lactation women 
14-18 years 400 
19-50 years 400 
(Source: IOM, 2000) 
385 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Selenium 
21.9 R esearch recommendations 
The following priority areas of research are recommend ed: 
• As sessment of selenium intakes among various ethnic, socioeconomic, age and gender 
groups 
• Bioavailability studies of selenium from the local food sources. 
• Cross-sectional and longitudinal studies on the prevalence of selenium deficiency in the 
• Relationship between low  Se intake and diet related chronic diseases. 
• Influences of soil comp osition and agricultural practices on selenium content of plant and 
anim al food sources. The information can then be used to docume nt selenium content 
in local foods. 
386 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Selenium 
21.10 References 
Ashton K, Hooper L, Harvey LJ, Hurst R, Casgrain A and Fairwea ther-Tait SJ (2009). Methods 
O f Assessm ent Of Selenium Status In Humans: A Systematic Review. Am J Clin Nutr 89, 
2025S-2039S. 
Cabrera. IZ and Barba C .VC (2005). Selenium-Recomm ended dietary allow ances: 
Harmonization in Southeast Asia. International Life Sciences Institute, Southeast Asia 
Region. 
Du ffield AJ, Thomso n CD, Hill KE  & W illiams S (1999). An estimation of selenium requirem ents 
for New  Zealanders. Am J Clin Nutr 70: 896-903. 
E FSA (2014). Scientific opinion on dietary reference values for selenium. EFSA  Panel on Dietetic 
Products, Nutrition and Allergies (NDA), Eur opean Food Safety Authority. EFSA Journal 
2014;12(10):3846. 
European Comm ission (2000). Opinion of the Scientific Committee on Food on the Tolerable 
Up per Intake of Selenium. Health & Consumer Protection Directorate-Ge neral. Scientific 
Com mittee on Food. SCF/CS/NUT /UPPLEV/25 Final. 28 Novem ber 2000. European 
Co mmi ssion. 
FairweatherTait SJ, Bao Y, Broadley MR, Collings R, Ford D, Hesketh JE and Hurst R (2011). 
Selenium in Human Health and D isease. Antioxidants and R edox Signalling, 14, 1337- 
1383. 
FAO /WH O  (2004). Vitamin And Mineral Requirements In Human  Nutrition. Second edition. 
Report of a Joint FAO/WH O Expert Consultation; pp 194-216. 
Harshman  MR and A ldoori W  (2007). The Relevance of Selenium to Immunity, Cancer, and 
Infectious/Inflammatory Diseases. Canadian Journal of Dietetic Practice and R esearch, 
66(2): 98-102. 
Health Promot ion Board (2011) Energy and Nutrient Composition of Food. Singapore 
Hurst R, Collings R, Harvey LJ, King M, Hooper L, Bouwman J, Gurinovic M a nd Fairweather- 
Tait SJ (2013). EUR REC A -Estimating Selenium Requirements For Deriving D ietary 
Reference Values. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 53, 1077-1096. 
IOM (2000). Selenium. In: Dietary Reference Intakes for Ascorbic acid, Vitamin E, Selenium, and 
Carotenoids. Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine. National Aca demy  Press, 
Washi ngton DC; chapter 7, pp 284-324. 
Kristal AR, Darke AK, Morris JS, Tangen CM, Goodman PJ, Thompsonn IM, Meyskens Jr FL, 
Go odma n GE , Minasian LM, Parnes HL, Lippman  SM and Klein EA  (2014). Baseline 
Selenium Status and Effects of Selenium and Vitamin E Suppleme ntation on Prostate 
Cancer Risk. JNCI J Natl Cancer Inst 106 (3): djt456. 
387 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Selenium 
Kuila A, Muk hopadhyay M and Banerje R (2012). Selenium : Beneficial and Toxic Effect on 
H uman. Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur-721302 
Loef M , N. Schrauzer G and Walach H (2011). Selenium And Alzheimer’s Disease: A Systematic 
Review. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 26, 81-104. 
Me hdi Y , Hornick JL, Istasse L and Dufrasne I (2013). Selenium in the Environme nt, Metabolism 
and Involvement in Body Functions. Molecules , 18(3), 3292-3311. 
N ational Research Council (1989). Recomm ended Dietary Allowances. 10th ed. Washington. 
D C, National Research Council. National Academy  of Sciences. 
Stranges S, Marshall JR, Natarajan R, Donahue RP , Trevisan M, Com bs GF, Cappuccio FP , 
Ceriello A and Reid ME  (2007). Effects Of Long-Term Selenium Supplem entation On The 
Incidence Of Type 2 Diab etes: A Randomized Trial. A nnals of Internal Medicine, 147, 
217-223. 
Sunde RA (2012). Selenium . In: Modern Nutrition In Health An d Disease. Eds Ross AC, 
Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL and Ziegler TR. Lippincott Williams &  Wilkins, 
Philadelphia, USA , 225-237. 
Suzana S, Cham  BG, Ahmad Rohi G, Mohd Rizal R, Fairulnizal MN , Norma h H, Fatimah A (2009). 
Relationship between selenium and breast cancer: a case-control study in the Klang 
Valley. Singapore Medical Journal; 50 (3): 265O. 
W HO/FAO/ IAEA  (1996). Trace Elements in Hum an Nutrition and He alth. World Health 
O rganization, Geneva. 
Yang GQ, Zhu LZ, Liu SJ, Gu LZ, Q ian PC , Huang JH & Lu M D (198 7).  Hum an Selenium 
R equirements in China. In: Selenium in Biology and Medicine. Combs GR, Spallholz JE, 
Levander OA , Oldfield JE (Eds). Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., New York. pp 589-607. 
Zachara BA, Pawluk H, Korenkiewicz J and Skok Z (2001). Selenium Levels In Kidney, Liver 
A nd Heart Of Newborns And Infants. Early Human Developmen t, 63, 103-111. 
388 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Selenium 
M alaysia (201 7) 
Age groups R N I 
(µg/day) 
Appendix 21 .1  Com parison of recom m ended intake for Selenium : R N I M alaysia (201 7) and (2005), R N I of FAO /W H O  (2004 ), AI and R D A of IO M 
(2000) and EPSA (201 4 ) 
M alaysia (2005) 
Age groups R N I 
(µg/day) 
FAO /W H O  (2004 ) 
Age groups R N I 
(µg/day) 
IO M  (2000) 
Age groups AI 
(µg/day) 
EFSA (201 4 ) 
Age groups AI 
(µg/day) 
Infants (Boys) Infants Infants Infants 
0 - 5 m onths 6 0 - 5 m onths 6 0 - 6 m onths 6 0 - 6 m onths 15 7 - 11 m onths 15 
6 - 11 m onths 10 6 - 12 m onths 9 7 - 11 m onths 10 7 - 12 m onths 20 1 - 3 years 15 
4 - 6 years 20 
Infants (G irls) 
0 - 5 m onths 6 R D A (m g/day) 7 - 10 years 35 
6 - 11 m onths 9 11 - 14 years 55 
Children Children Children Children 
(Boys) 
1 - 3 years 17 1 - 3 years 17 1 - 3 years 17 1 - 3 years 20 15 - 17 years 70 
4 - 6 years 21 4 - 6 years 21 4 - 6 years 22 4 - 8  years 30 ≥18  years 70 
7 - 9  years 22 7 - 9  years 22 7 - 9  years 21 pregnancy 70 
lactation 8 5 
(G irls) 
1 - 3 years 16 
4 - 6 years 21 
7 - 9  years 21 
Boys Boys Boys Boys 
10 - 18  years 21 10 - 18  years 28 10 - 18  years 32 9  - 13 years 40 
13 - 15 years 31 14 - 18  years 55 
16 - 18  years 37 
G irls G irls G irls G irls 
10 - 18  years 19 10 - 18  years 23 10 - 18  years 26 9  - 13 years 40 
13 - 15 years 24 14 - 18  years 55 
16 - 18  years 26 
389 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Selenium 
M alaysia (201 7) 
Age groups R N I 
(µg/day) 
M alaysia (2005) 
Age groups R N I 
(µg/day) 
FAO /W H O  (2004 ) 
Age groups R N I 
(µg/day) 
IO M  (2000) 
Age groups AI 
(µg/day) 
EFSA (201 4 ) 
Age groups AI 
(µg/day) 
Adults Adults Adults Adults 
M en M en M en M en 
19  - 29  years 32 19  - 65 years 33 19  - 65 years 34 19  - 30 years 55 
30 - 59  years 32 > 65 years 29 > 65 years 33 31 - 50 years 55 
> 60 years 31 51 - 70 years 55 
60 - 64 years 31 > 70 years 55 
≥ 65 years 30 
W om en W om en W om en W om en 
19  - 29  years 25 19  - 65 years 25 19  - 65 years 26 19  - 30 years 55 
30 - 59  years 24 > 65 years 23 > 65 years 25 31 - 50 years 55 
> 60 years 23 51 - 70 years 55 
60 - 64 years 23 > 70 years 55 
≥ 65 years 23 
Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy 
1st trim ester 25 1st trim ester 25 1st trim ester 26 14 - 18  years 60 
2nd trim ester 27 2nd trim ester 27 2nd trim ester 28 19  - 30 years 60 
3rd trim ester 29 3rd trim ester 29 3rd trim ester 30 31 - 50 years 60 
Lactation Lactation Lactation Lactation 
0 - 3 m onths 34 0 - 3 m onths 34 0 - 3 m onths 35 14 - 18  years 70 
4 - 6 m onths 34 4 - 6 m onths 34 4 - 6 m onths 35 19  - 30 years 70 
7 - 12 m onths 41 7 - 12 m onths 41 7 - 12 m onths 42 31 - 50 years 70 
390 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
22 • Phosphorus 
22.1 Introduction 
At 0.099%, phosphorus is the most abundant pnictogen in the Earth’s crust. It is a 
chemical element with symbol P and an atomic number of 15. Phosphorus exists in two major 
forms, namely the white and the red phosphorus. As phosphorus is highly reactive, it is not 
found as a free elem ent on Earth but is widely distributed in many minerals, m ainly as 
phosphates. The largest use of phosphorus compounds is for fertilizers. It is also important in 
the production of steels, special glasses and fine chinaware. Phosphorus compr ises 
approximately 1% of total body weight (Farrow and White, 2010; Penido and Alon, 2012) and 
is the second most abundant macro mineral that existed in human body after calcium. 
22.2 Functions 
Phosphorus plays a vital role in the maintenance of human health and involves in various 
physiological processes. Phosph ate acts as component of high-energy mo lecules such as 
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and creatine phosphate. W hen cleavage occur between the bond 
of phosphate molecules, energy is release for the body to function norm ally. Besides that, 
phosphorus provides structure to the cell me m branes by acting as compo nent of phospholipids. 
In bone and teeth, it acts as component of hydroxyapatite and calcium  phosphate, w hich 
provides strength for bone and teeth. In addition, it acts as an important element in the structural 
comp onent of DNA and RNA, underpins its function in cell regulation and signaling. Lastly, 
phosphate also acts as buffer in the body by regulating the pH of the extracellular fluid (Kalantar- 
Zadeh et al., 2010). 
22.3 Metabolism 
Intestinal phosphorus absorption occurs through both cellular and paracellular pathways 
(Sabbag h et al., 2011; Penido and Alon, 2012), and at least tw o mechanisms, i.e. passive 
diffusion and sodium-dependent active transport (Eto et al., 2006) are involved. Dietary 
phosphate, 1 α, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25(OH) 2D 3), and parathyroid hormones (PTH) are 
thought to be the most important physiological regulators of intestinal phosphate absorption 
(Penido and Alon, 2012). Dietary phosphorus is absorbed by the epithelium  of the sma ll 
intestine (duodenum  and jejunum) via both a passive diffusional, load-dependent process 
(depends on the amount of phosphorus in the gut) and an active sodium dependent process 
(increased by 1,25(OH) 2D 3) (Amanzadeh & Reilly., 2006). 
Intestinal phosphatases hydrolyze the organic forms contained in ingested protoplasm, 
and thus most phosphorus absorption occurs as inorganic phosphate. Phosphorus is absorbed 
with high efficiency. Net absorption of total phosphorus ranges from  55 to 80 % in adults 
(Heaney, 2012; Leman n, 1996 ; Nordin, 1989;  O’Brien et al., 2014) and from 65 to 90% in infants 
and children (Wilkinson, 1976; Heaney, 2012; O ’Brien et al., 2014). Phosphorus absorption is 
affected by the total amount  of phosphorus in the diet and also by the type of phosphorus 
(organic versus inorganic), the food origin (animal-versus plant-derived) and the ratio of 
phosphorus to other dietary components (EFSA, 2015). Absorption of phosphorus is reduced 
by ingestion of aluminum-containing antacids and by pharm acologic doses of calcium 
carbonate. There is, howe ver, no significant interference with phosphorus absorption by calcium 
391 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Phosphorus 
at intakes within the typical adult range. There is no evidence that absorption efficiency of 
phosphorus varies with dietary intake and there is no apparent adaptive mechanism that 
improves phosphorus absorption at low intakes (Leman n, 199 6), unlike calcium where 
absorption efficiency increases as dietary intake decreases and adaptive mechanisms exist that 
improve calcium absorption still further at habitual low intakes. 
Ex cretion of endogenous phosphorus is mainly through the kidneys. In the healthy adult, 
urine phosphorus is essentially equal to absorbed diet phosphorus, less sm all amounts of 
phosphorus lost in shed cells of skin and intestinal mucosa. The proximal tubule reabsorbs 
m ost of the filtered phosphorus (75%) followed by distal tubule (10%) and the rest (15%) is 
excreted through urine (Noori et al., 2010). Several factors such as phosphate depletion, 
calcitriol, volume depletion, metabolic alkalosis, chronic hypocalcem ia and the hormones 
insulin, estrogen, thyroid horm one, and growth horm one will increase the reabsorption of renal 
tubular phosphorus. On the other hand, parathyroid horm one, phosphatonins, acidosis, 
hyperphosphatem ia, chronic hypercalcemia, and volume  expansion will reduce the reabsorption 
of renal tubular phosphorus (Uribarri, 2007). 
Phosphorus hom eostasis is tightly regulated by the bone-kidney-parathyroid gland axis, 
involving PTH, the active metabolite of vitamin D (1,25 (OH) 2 D ) and the phosphatonin fibroblast 
grow th factor-23 (FG F-23), mainly produced and secreted by osteocytes in bone (Berndt and 
Kumar, 2009; Bergwitz and Jüppner, 2010). In adults, under norm al physiological conditions, 
the amount  of phosphorus entering the phosphorus pool from bone resorption equals that 
exiting the pool for bone formation (Hruska et al., 2008). Intestine and the kidneys are involved 
in phosphate homeostasis by regulating absorption of phosphorus from  the diet and 
phosphorus excretion (Berndt and Kum ar, 2007). Figure 22.1 below depicts the me tabolism of 
phosphorus (Uribarri, 2007). 
1500 mg/day 
GI 
tract 
Intracellular P 
Extracellular 
Space 
600 mg/day 900 mg/day 
Net GI 
absorption 
900 mg/day 
Form ation 
200 mg/day 
Resorption 
200 mg/day 
Figure 22.1: Phosphorus Homeostasis 
392 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Phosphorus 
About 85% of the phosphorus in human body is present in teeth and bones, with the 
remaining 14% in soft tissues, including muscle, liver, heart and kidney, and only 1% in the 
extracellular fluid (O’Brien et al., 2014). Hence, serum measurements may reflect only a minor 
fraction of total body phosphorus, and do not consistently reflect total body stores (Moe, 2008). 
At birth, a neonate contains approximately 20 g phosphorus (0.5 g/100 g fat free tissue), most 
of which is accumulated during the last 8 weeks of pregnancy (Widdows on &  Spray, 1951). 
Assuming continuous growth and maturity at 18 years, phosphorus accretion rates have been 
estimated at 66 mg/day at age 4-12 months and at 107 mg/day in boys and 80 mg/day in girls, 
(Prentice and Bates, 1994). In adults, using total body neutron activation analysis, total body 
phosphorus was reported to range from 374 ± 60 g to 439 ± 70 g in Caucasian wome n aged 
between 20 and 74 years and from 461 ± 82 g to 561 ± 69 g in Caucasian men aged between 
20 and 90 years in the USA (Ellis, 1990). Hence, total body phosphorus has been reported to 
be in the order of 400-800 g (Moe, 2008). 
In the past, a great deal of emphasis was placed on the calcium -phosphorus ratio (Ca:P) 
of diets (Chinn, 1981), particularly those of infants (Fomon & Ne lson, 1993). This is a useful 
concept during periods of rapid growth but has little relevance in adults wh en assessing 
requirem ents. Also, the ratio does not take into account differing bio-availabilities and adaptive 
responses of the tw o nutrients. In balance studies in human adults, Ca:P molar ratios ranging 
from  0.08 to 2.4 (a 30 fold range) had no effect on either calcium  balance or absorption (Heaney 
&  Recker, 1982). For this reason, there is little or no evidence for relating the two nutrients 
during most of human life. Other indicators are now used to assess phosphorus requirements, 
including measurement of inorganic phosphorus in serum (serum Pi) or phosphorus balance. 
Anim al studies have shown that niacinam ide, w hich is a circulating form  of niacin, 
prevents an increase in serum  phosphate in animals with renal failure by reducing sodium - 
phosphate 2b transporter expression in the jejunum and inhibiting intestinal phosphorus 
absorption (Katai et al., 1999; Eto et al., 2005). Limited human clinical trials have also shown 
that niacinamide and niacin accomplish clinically significant reductions in serum phosphate in 
patients undergoing dialysis (Takahashi et al., 2004; Muller et al., 2007; Cheng et al., 2008 ; 
Sam pathkumar et al., 2006; Restrepo Valencia  et al., 2008) or dyslipidem ia patients with 
advanced renal failure (Maccubbin et al., 2010). To the best of know ledge, there is no study 
available on the effect of niacin or niacinamide on phosphorus absorption among  healthy 
individual. 
22.4 Sources 
Food phosphorus is a mixture of inorganic and organic forms. Phosphates are found in 
foods as naturally occurring components of biological molecules and as food additives in the 
form  of various phosphate salts. Phosphorus is widely distributed in foods. All foods from 
animal tissues contain different amo unts of phosphorus (Noori et al., 2010). Rich food sources 
of phosphorus include cheese, meat, fish, poultry and nuts. M eanwh ile, there is only sma ll 
amount of organic phosphorus in plants. In addition, phosphorus in plant (about 75%) exists 
393 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Phosphorus 
in the form  of phytic acid or phytate (Uribarri &  Calvo, 2003; No ori et al., 2010), which has 
poor bioavailability. In Europe, milk and dairy products (30-53%), grains and grain-based 
products (27-38%) are the main food groups contributing to phosphorus intake. The 
contribution of meat and meat products was between 10 and 25 % in the age groups from 10 
years and above (EFSA, 2015). 
Besides organic dietary phosphorus, sources of phosphorus include inorganic 
phosphorus, mainly contributed by phosphate additives which are widely use during industrial 
food processing to extend conservation, enhance color or flavor, and retain moisture. The use 
of phosphorus-containing food additives in processed foods and cola beverages contribute 
substantially to total phosphorus intake. In recent studies, it is estima ted that the extra burden 
of phosphorus coming from processed food ma y reach 700-800 mg per day (León, Sullivan & 
Sehgal, 2013; Carrigan et al., 2014). However, phosphate additives does not usually appear in 
the common databases and food compositions tables (Benini et al., 2011; Cupisti et al., 2012). 
Table 22.1 shows the phosphorus content of common foods  in Malaysia. 
Table 22.1: Phosphorus content of foods. 
mg/100g Edible Portion 
M ilk and milk products 
Skimmed milk powder 930 
Cheddar cheese 460 
U HT chocolate milk 95 
M alted Milk Drink 91 
Fresh Cow Milk 82 
M eat, fish, poultry 
D ried Prawn 727 
Hen egg yolk 586 
D uck egg yolk 360 
Ikan Kembong (Indian Mackerel) 263 
Beef frankfurter* 245 
Black Pomfret 237 
Century egg 218 
Chicken breast meat 205 
Chicken frankfurter* 205 
Beef burger patty* 201 
Ikan Kurau (Threadfin) 181 
Canned sardine 159 
Chicken burger patty* 156 
Lean Mutton 146 
Fish ball* 100 
394 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Phosphorus 
Source: Malaysian Food Composition Database (MyFCD) 2016 
* May contain higher phosphorus as indicated due to presence of phosphate additives 
m g/100g Edible Portion 
Lean Beef 82 
Legumes and nuts 
Fucok (Soya bean curd sheet) 577 
Cashew nuts 359 
W alnut 333 
Fried Tofu (soya bean curd) 287 
Tau-hoo-pok (Soya bean curd) 264 
Peanut / groundnut 246 
Cooked Dishes 
Fried Chicken 467 
Beef Satay 462 
Papadam (Black gram cracker) 382 
Beef curry 349 
Chicken Satay 335 
Vadai (Yellow dhall) 302 
M urtabak (meat egg pancake) 258 
Chappatti (unleavened flatbread) 244 
Yau-Char-Kue (fried breadstick) 169 
G reen gram porridge with coconut milk 163 
Roti telur (Indian flatbread with eggg 154 
Ham Chin Peng (Cantonese fried doughnut) 151 
Roti Canai (Indian flatbread) 143 
Pizza (with Chicken & Pineapple) 114 
M ee Bandung (spicy noodle dish) 81 
Cola drinks* 69 
Fried rice 52 
N asi lemak (Coconut milk rice) 51 
395 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Phosphorus 
22.5 D eficiency 
In the presence of norma l kidney function, fasting serum phosphorus is maintained 
w ithin a tight range despite w ide fluctuations in dietary phosphorus intake through variations 
in the urinary phosphorus excretion (Nadkarni & Uribbari, 2014), hence phosphorus deficiency 
(hypophosphatem ia) or excess (hyperphosphatem ia) is extrem ely rare among general 
population. However, public health concern for excess phosphorus intake beyond nutrient 
requiremen ts stems  from the grow ing epidemiologic evidence that elevated serum phosphorus 
and its associated health outcomes have been extended to the general population. This becomes 
even more important in view of the increasing dietary phosphorus intake attributed to the 
increased consumption of foods processed with phosphate additives. 
D ietary phosphorus intake is increasing as a result of the growing consump tion of foods 
processed with phosphate additives. Using the National Health and Nutritional E xam ination 
Survey (NHANES  2005-2006), 50% of the US  population consume s 1000 mg/d, far exceeding 
the requirements (Moshfegh et al., 2009). NHANES surveys over the past three decades had 
consistently reported phosphorus intakes are generally in excess of the requirements for all 
ages, except for rapidly growing young adults (Calvo & Uribarri, 2013). In nine European Union 
countries, mean phosphorus intakes range from  265 to 531 mg/day in infants, from  641 to 973 
m g/day in children aged 1 to < 3 years, from 750 to 1202 mg/day in children aged 3 to < 10 
years, from 990 to 1 601 mg/day in children aged 10 to < 18 years and from 1000 to 1 767 
m g/day in adults ((18  years) (E FSA, 2015), which were in general higher than the recommended 
intakes. Studies are scarce on the phosphorus intake among M alaysian. The available nationwide 
study reported that the phosphorus intake was 1195m g/day and 1220mg/day for children aged 
6-9 year old and 10-12 year old, respectively (Jan Moha med et al., 2015). An estimated intake 
of 842 mg/day wa s reported amon g early adolescents (Abdul Ma jid et al., 2016). A precise 
assessment of dietary phosphorus intake is difficult because of the questionable accuracy of 
dietary instruments and databases used to estimate phosphorus in foods in all its forms, 
particularly inorganic sources from  phosphorus-based food additives and dietary supplements 
(Calvo and Uribarri, 2013). Hence dietary phosphorus intake may be underestimated by 20% 
as nutrient content databases are unable to capture contribution by phosphate additives 
(Oe nning, Vogel & Calvo, 1988 ; Sullivan, Leon, Sehgal, 2007). Hyperphosphatemia may further 
progress to secondary hyperparathyroidism (Mar tin & González, 2011), skeletal deformations, 
bone loss and/or ectopic calcification in animal studies. However, such effects were generally 
not observed in huma n studies, except in patients with end-stage renal disease. Excessive 
phosphorus intake from supplements w ith dosages greater than 750 mg /day has been 
associated with gastrointestinal symptoms , such as osm otic diarrhoea, nausea and vomiting in 
healthy subjects (EFSA, 2005). 
A s phosphorus is widely distributed in the food supply that phosphorus deficiency is 
extremely rare, the exception being individual on long-term and severe food restriction. Also, 
as aluminum-containing antacids will bind diet phosphorus in the gut, when consumed in high 
doses, it may produce hypophosphatemia and aggravate phosphate deficiency related to other 
problems. Symptoms of hypophosphatem ia may  include anorexia, increase susceptibility to 
infection (Lotz et al., 1968), skeletal demineralization and muscular weakness (Takeda et al., 
2012).  
396 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Phosphorus 
Wi th regards to suitability as marker of phosphorus intake or phosphorus status, in view 
of the lacking of accurate dietary instruments and nutrition databases to estimate total dietary 
phosphorus in foods, particularly inorganic sources from phosphorus-based food additives 
and dietary supplements, several biomarkers including serum/plasma inorganic phosphorus 
(IOM , 199 7) and urinary phosphorus excretion had been proposed as surrogate markers of 
phosphorus intake beyond dietary estimates. Concentration of serum or plasma  inorganic 
phosphorus show s only minimal modifications as a result of tight regulation of homeostatic 
mechanisms, even in the presence of wide variations in intake (EFS A , 2015). As there is only 
approximately 1% of total body phosphorus found in extracellular fluid, hence serum  inorganic 
phosphorus is generally inadequately reflects body stores. Serum inorganic phosphorus is also 
influenced by age, sex, lactation, diurnal and seasonal variations, vitam in D  status and 
pathological conditions such as malabsorption syndromes and insulin-dependent diabetes 
mellitus (Gibson, 2005), hence making it unsuitable as biomarker for phosphorus intake and 
status. N ew  markers of phosphorus balance such as fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) had 
been recently proposed as a better biomarker of disturbances of phosphorus homeostasis in 
general (Gutierrez, 2013), attributed by its greater magnitude and strength of the association 
with adverse outcomes than that of serum phosphorus itself and its less random variation than 
other markers of phosphorus metabolism such as serum phosphorus concentrations (Isakova, 
Gut ierrez & Wolf, 2009). However, studies to determine the effect of dietary phosphorus intake 
on FGF23 concentrations in community-dwelling individuals and whether the reduction of FGF 
23 has a salutary effect on cardiovascular health are scarce. To date, the EFSA  (2015) concluded 
there is currently no reliable biomarker of phosphorus intake and status that may be used for 
deriving the requirement for phosphorus. 
22.6 Factors Affecting Phosphorus Requirement 
There is no direct studies available showing that phosphorus requirem ent varies 
according to physiological changes. Both pregnancy and lactation are associated with 
physiological adaptive changes in mineral metabolism that are independent of maternal mineral 
supply within the range of normal dietary intakes. These adaptive processes provide the 
minerals including phosphorus, necessary for fetal growth and breast milk production without 
requiring an increase in maternal dietary intake or compromising maternal bone health in the 
long term (Prentice, 2003). Phosphorus requirement is also similar between men and wome n. 
Across the age groups, phosphorus requirement is higher in adolescents compar ed to adult 
men and wom en, while there is no different in phosphorus requireme nt among young or older 
adults. 
The bioavailability of phosphorus from  an individual food may differ substantially 
depending on the form of phosphorus found in the food and the presence of other nutrients in 
the meal (Uribarri 2007; Kalantar-Zadeh et al. 2010). Dairy foods contain abundant calcium, 
wh ich build complexes with phosphate in the intestine, thereby reducing phosphorus absorption 
(Heaney & Nordin 2002). Phosphorus from casein was found to affect phosphate metabolism 
mor e profoundly than the same amount of phosphorus from grains in a rat study, im plying 
relatively good phosphorus bioavailability from casein (M oe et al., 2009). With regards to type 
of milk, the efficiency of absorption is highest from human milk (85 to 90%) (Williams et al., 
197 0), interme diate from cow milk (72%) (Ziegler and Fomon, 1983) , and lowest from soy 
formulas (~59%) (Ziegler and Fomon, 1983). Howe ver infant form ulas contain substantially 
397 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Phosphorus 
greater amounts of phosphorus than huma n milk, the absorbed phosphorus from cow milk 
and soy form ulas is twice that attained by human  milk-fed infants (Moya  et al., 19 9 2). Relatively 
low intakes of phosphorus, as occur in human milk, may actually confer an advantage to the 
infant by virtue of the low residual phosphorus in the lower bowel, reduce the proliferation of 
potentially pathogenic microorganisms and provide an immune protective effect for infant fed 
on huma n milk. Data on phosphorus bioavailability from meat are scarce (Schuette & Linkswiler, 
1982 ), even though generally phosphorus from  meat is considered to be well absorbed 
(U ribarri, 2007). 
In general, most food sources exhibit good phosphorus bioavailability except plant seeds 
(beans, peas, cereals, nuts) which contain phytic acid. Phytic acid cannot be hydrolyze by the 
digestive systems o f most mamm als and hence limits its availability. The phosphorus 
bioavailability of plant seeds can be improved with the presence of phytase, bacterial enzymes 
and yeast. Hence, while phosphorus from animal sources is easily absorbed, the bioavailability 
of phosphorus from  plant foods is relatively low, usually less than 50% (Uribarri & Calvo, 2003; 
N oori et al., 2010). Meanwhile, it is believed that over 90% of inorganic phosphate added in the 
processed foods is absorbed by our intestinal tract as compa red to organic phosphate. This is 
because the phosphate additives are salts that are not protein bounded hence, it is more easily 
disassociate and absorbed by the intestinal tract (Noori et al., 2010). 
22.7 Setting Requirements and Recom mended Intake of phosphorus 
The dietary recomm endations for phosphorus set by the Institute of Medicine (2006) 
used studies on serum inorganic phosphorus (serum Pi) concentrations. The level required to 
ma intain serum  Pi within an optimal range has been considered an indicator of phosphorus 
nutrition. The National Health and Medical Research Council (N HMRC)  for Australia and Ministry 
of Health New Zealand (NHMRC, 2006) set their phosphorus requireme nts based on graphical 
transformation technique assessing intake level required to reach lowest point for normal 
plasma phosphorus level. On the other hand, the recom menda tion by European Food Safety 
A uthority (European Food Safety Authority 2015) was based solely on the range of the molar 
ratio of calcium to phosphorus in the whole body. As no ted earlier, this approach is 
unsatisfactory. For this reason, the Technical Sub-Com mittee (TS C) on M inerals and Trace 
Elem ents decided to adopt values from IOM (2006) where the primary criterion used to set an 
Estimated Average Requirement (EAR) is serum Pi concentration (Appendix 22.1). 
Infants 
The AI for 0-6 months was calculated by multiplying the average intake of breast milk 
(0.78 L/day) by the average concentration of phosphorus in breast milk (124 mg/L) from 10 
studies reviewed by Atkinson et al. (1995), and rounding (IOM, 1997). The AI for 7-12 months 
w as set by adding an estimate for phosphorus from breast milk at this age to an estimate of 
intake from supplem entary foods. A breast milk volume of 0.60 L/day (Dewey et al. 1984, Heinig 
et al. 19 93) and the average concentration of phosphorus in breast milk at this age of 124 mg/L 
(Atkinson et al., 1995) give a contribution of 75 mg phosphorus/day from breast milk that is 
added to 200 mg/day from complementary foods (Specker et al., 1997). 
398 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Phosphorus 
AI for infants: 
0 - 6 m onths 100 m g /day 
7 to 12 mon ths 275 mg /day 
Children and Adolescents 
In the absence of data on serum Pi or phosphorus balance in children from 1-8 years, 
estimation of body accretion for these age groups was used on known tissue composition and 
growth rates (Fomon et al., 19 8 2; IOM 1997) using a conservative estimate of phosphorus 
absorption of 70%. The equation used to set EAR was equal to the sum of accretion and urinary 
loss, divided by fractional absorption. This gave an EAR of 380 mg for children aged 1-3 years 
which, with an assumed coefficient of variation (CV) of 10% for the EAR and rounding, gives 
an RDI  of 460 mg/day. For children aged 4-8 years, the EAR and the RDI were estimated to be 
405 mg/day and 500 mg/day, respectively. For 9-13 year olds, longitudinal data and a large 
cross-sectional database (Slemenda et al., 1994) allowed estimation of phosphorus requirem ent 
from tissue accretion data using a factorial approach (IOM,  2006) that was then also adopted 
for the 14-18 year-olds. The Phosphorus requirement for the healthy adolescents (9-18 years) 
is higher than the adult value in view of the intense growth, with growth rate, absorption 
efficiency, and normal values of inorganic phosphorus in the extracellular fluid changing at this 
period of time (IOM, 2006). The EAR for both age groups (9 to 13 years and 14 to 18 years) 
was  set at 1,055 mg/day. Assuming a CV of 10% for the EAR and rounding gave an RD I of 
1,250 mg. 
RN I for children and adolescents 
1 to 3 years 460 mg/day 
4 to 8 years 500 mg/day 
9 to 13 years 1250 mg/day 
14 t o 18 years 1250 m g /day 
Adults 
The EA R for adults was based on average dietary intake of phosphorus required from a 
typical mixed diet to reach the lowest point of the normal range for serum  Pi (Nordin, 198 9;  IOM; 
2006). The estimates assume an absorption efficiency of 62.5% (Heaney & Recker, 1982 ; 
Wilkinson, 1976). By definition, at this level of intake, only half the population will achieve a Pi 
above the bottom of the normal range. A CV of 35% for the EAR w as derived from consideration 
of the increase in ingested intake required to raise serum Pi from the bottom end of the normal 
range to a level of 3.1 mg/dL (1 mmo l/L), the fasting level attained by mos t well-nourished 
adults (N ordin, 1989; IOM 1997) giving an RDI of 1,000 mg. 
RN I for adults 
Adults 700 mg/day 
399 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Phosphorus 
Pregnan cy and Lactation 
A s there are no direct studies showing increased needs in pregnancy, the EAR and RDI 
we re set at those of the non-pregnant state. Similarly, increased bone resorption and decreased 
urinary excretion occurring independently of dietary intake provide the additional needs for milk 
production (Kent et al., 1990; 1991) and thus there is no evidence of increased needs in 
lactation. Hence, the EAR  and RDI were set at those of the non-lactation state. 
R N I for pregnancy and lactation 
14-18 ye ars 1250 mg/ day 
O ther age group 700 mg/day 
22.8 Tolerable upper intake levels 
Excess 
The UL is set at the intake associated with the upper boundary of norma l values of serum 
Pi. The upper boundaries are higher in infants than in adults and there is no evidence that 
intakes at the adult upper boundary cause harm. The higher boundaries in infants are obviously 
tissue-safe and assuming they approximate the upper normal human value, the corresponding 
ingested intake in an adult would be more than 10,000 mg/day. A No-Observed-Adve rse-Effect 
Level (NOAEL) of 10,000 mg/day was therefore set (IOM , 19 9 7). Inform ation concerning 
adverse effects in the area between normal Pi and levels associated with ectopic mineralization 
is lacking. In keeping with pharma cokinetic practice when relationships between intake and 
blood level are known  (Petley et al., 199 5), an uncertainty factor (UF) of 2.5 was chosen, taking 
the UL for adults to 4,000 mg/day. For adults over 70 years, because of increased prevalence 
of kidney damage, a larger UF of 3.3 was applied, giving a UL of 3,000 mg/day. In pregnancy, 
absorption efficiency rises by about 15% so the U L was set 15% lower at 3,500 mg/day. In 
lactation, phosphorus metabolism is the same as in the non-pregnant state, so the UL stays at 
4,000 mg/day. 
For children, an upper level of intake of 3,000 mg/day was set by dividing the NOAEL for 
adults by an uncertainty factor of about 3.3 for potentially increased susceptibility related to 
sm aller body size. For children, 9-18 years, the adult UL was applied as there was no evidence 
to suggest increased susceptibility. 
Infants Not possible to establish. Sources of intake should be from breast milk and 
supplementary foods 
Children 
1 – 3 years 3000 mg/day 
4 – 8 years 3000 mg/day 
Adolescents 
9 - 13 years 4000 mg/day 
14 – 18 years 4000 mg/day 
Adults 
19 – 30 years 4000 mg/day 
31 - 50 years 4000 mg/day 
50 – 70 years 4000 mg/day 
> 70 years 4000 mg/day 
Pregnancy 
≤ 18 years 3500 mg/day 
19 - 50 years 3500 mg/day 
Lactation 
≤ 18 years 4000 mg/day 
19 - 50 years 4000 mg/day 
400 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Phosphorus 
No harm  is known to occur for some groups in the comm unity, especially those with 
high energy intakes if dietary phosphorus intakes go above the UL limits. Nevertheless, 
dysfunction of phosphorus homeostasis will lead to serious clinical consequences in healthy 
individuals and those with conditions, such as advanced kidney diseases, in which 
hyperphosphatem ia is associated with increased risks of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality 
(Ritter & Slatopolsky, 2016). Excessive dietary phosphorus intake can increase the risk of bone 
fractures by 9% with every 100 mg of phosphorus intake in a norma l healthy person. This is 
attributed to the hormonal changes equivalent to mild hyperparathyroidism and reduces 
calcitriol concentrations associated with excessive dietary phosphorus intake (Takeda et al., 
2012). Besides that, serum  phosphate concentration above norma l range is associated with 
the development of atherosclerosis in human with normal kidney function. In healthy human 
with normal kidney function, although long term excessive phosphorus intake does not cause 
hyperphosphatemia, it can increase the risk of getting cardiovascular disease and carotid intima 
m edia thickness (Takeda et al., 2012). Table 22.2 depicts the UL of phosphorus according to age 
groups. 
Table 22.2. Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (UL) of Phosphorus for various age groups 
UL 
Source: IOM (2006) 
401 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Phosphorus 
22.9 R esearch recommendations 
The scarcity of dietary intake data on phosphorus intake signifies future national dietary 
surveillance to include the assessme nt of dietary phosphorus at the population level. Future 
updates on the Mal aysian Food Com position Database should consider to analyze phosphorus 
content of processed foods and carbonated beverages as these are not extensively covered on 
the current database. On the other hand, as the current food composition database does not 
adequately take into account the current use of phosphate additives, the nutrient contents of 
foods should be revised to reflect the actual amount of phosphate additives.  
402 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Phosphorus 
22.10 References 
Abdul M ajid H, Ramli L, Ying SP , Su TT, Jalaludin MY & Ab dul Mohs ein N A S (2016). Dietary 
Intake among  Adolescents in a Middle-Income  Country: An Outcome  from the Malaysian 
Health and A dolescents Longitudinal Research Team Study (the MyHeAR Ts Study). PLoS 
ON E 11(5): e0155447. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0155447. 
Amanz adeh J & Reilly RF (2006). Hypophosphatemia: an evidence-based approach to its clinical 
consequences and management. Nat Clin Pract Neph rol 2:136 -148. 
A tkinson SA, Alston-Mills BZP , Lonnerdal B, Neville MC & Thom son MP (1995). Major minerals 
and ionic constituents of human and bovine milk. In: Jensen RJ, ed. H andbook of milk 
composition. California: Academic Press. Pp 593-619. 
Benini O , D’Alessandro C, Gianfaldoni D & Cupisti A (2011). Extra-phosphate load from food 
additives in commo nly eaten foods: a renal and insidious danger for renal patients. J Ren 
Nu tr 21: 303-308. 
Bergwitz C & Jüppner H (2010). Regulation of phosphate homeostasis by PTH, vitamin D , and 
FG F23. Ann Rev Med 61: 91-104. 
Berndt T & Kumar  R (2007). Phosphatonins and the regulation of phosphate homeostasis. An n 
Rev Physiol 69: 341-359. 
Berndt T &  Kumar R (2009). Novel mechanisms in the regulation of phosphorus hom eostasis. 
Physiology 24: 17-25. 
Calvo MS & Uribarri J (2013). Public health impact of dietary phosphorus excess on bone and 
Cardio-vascular health in the general population. Am J Clin Nutr 98: 6-15. 
Carrigan A, Klinger A, Choquette SS, Luzuriaga-McPherson A, Bell EK, Dar nell B & Gutiérrez OM 
(2014). Contribution of food additives to sodium and phosphorus content of diets rich 
in processed foods. J Ren Nutr 24(1):13-19. 
Cheng SC, Young DO, Huang Y, Delmez JA & Coyne DW (2008) A randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial of niacinamide for reduction of phosphorus in hemo dialysis 
patients. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 3:1131-1138. 
Chinn HI (1981). Effects of dietary factors on skeletal integrity in adults: calcium, phosphorus, 
vitam in D and protein. Prepared for the Bureau of Foods, Food and Drug Administration, 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Washington, DC. 
Cupisti A, Benini O, Ferretti V, Gianfaldoni D & Kalantar-Zadeh K (2012). Novel differential 
measur em ent of natural and added phosphorus in cooked ham  with or without 
preservatives. J Ren Nutr 22(6): 533-540. 
Dew ey KG, Finley DA & Lonnerdal B (1984). Breast milk volume and compos ition during late 
lactation (7-20 months). J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 3:713-720. 
403 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Phosphorus 
E FSA (2015). ND A  Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies) (2015). Scientific Opinion 
on Dietary Reference Values for phosphorus. EFSA  Journal 13(7):418 5, 54 pp. 
doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2015.4185 
Ellis KJ (1990). Reference man and woman more fully characterized. Variations on the basis of 
body size, age, sex, and race. Bio Trace Element Res 26: 385-400. 
E to N , Miyata Y, Ohno H & Yamash ita T (2005). N icotinamide prevents the development of 
hyperphosphatemia by suppressing intestinal sodium-dependent phosphate transporter 
in rats with adenin-induced renal failure. N ephrol Dial Transplant 20:1378-1384. 
Eto N, Tom ita M &  Hayashi M (2006). NaP i-mediated transcellular permeation is the dominant 
route in intestinal inorganic phosphate absorption in rats. Drug M etab Pharm acokinetics 
21: 217-221. 
Farrow EG &  White KE (2010). Recent advances in renal phosphate handling. Na ture Rev 
N ephrol 6: 207-217. 
Heinig MJ, Nomm sen LA, Peerson JM , Lonnerdal &  D ewe y KG (1993). Energy and protein 
intakes of breast-fed and formula-fed infants during the first year of life and their 
association with growth velocity: the DA RLING study. Am J Clin Nutr 58:152-161. 
Fom on SJ, Haschke F, Ziegler EE & Nelson SE (1982). Body composition of reference children 
from birth to age 10 years. Am J Clin Nutr 35:1169-1175. 
Fom on SJ & Nelson SE (1993). Calcium, phosphorus, magnesium and sulphur. In: Fomon SJ, 
ed. Nutrition of normal infants. St..Louis: Mosby-Year Book Inc. Pp 192-216. 
G ibson RS (2005). Principles of nutritional assessm ent, 2nd edition. Oxford University Press, 
N ew  York, NY, USA , 928 pp. 
G utierrez OM (2013). The connection between dietary phosphorus, cardiovascular disease, and 
m ortality: where we stand and what we need to know. Ad v Nutr 4: 723-729. 
Heaney RP & Nordin BE (2002). Calcium effects on phosphorus absorption: implications for the 
prevention and co-therapy of osteoporosis. J Am Coll Nutr 21:239-244. 
Heaney RP &  Recker RR (198 2). Effects of nitrogen, phosphorus, and caffeine on calcium 
balance in women. J Lab Clin Med 99: 46-55. 
Heaney RP (2012). Phosphorus. In: Present Know ledge in Nutrition. Ed s Erdman JW, Jr, 
M acdonald IA and Zeisel SH. John Wiley & Sons, Washington, DC, USA, 447-458. 
Hruska KA, Mathew S, Lund R, Qiu P & Pratt R (2008). Hyperphosphatemia of chronic kidney 
disease. Kidney Int 74: 148-157. 
404 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Phosphorus 
IOM (1997). Dietary Reference Intakes for calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, vitam in D, and 
fluoride. Institute of Medicine. National Academy Press, W ashington, DC , USA, Pp 454. 
IOM  (2006). Dietary Reference Intakes: The Essential Guide to Nutrient Requirem ents. JJ Otten, 
J P Hellwig & L D  M eyers. Institute of Med icine. National Acad em y of Sciences, 
Washi ngton, D.C. 
Isakova T, Gutierrez OM  & Wol f M  (2009). A blueprint for random ized trials targeting 
phosphorus metabolism in chronic kidney disease. Kidney Int 76: 705-716. 
Jan M ohame d HJ, Loy SL, Moh d Taib MN, Karim NA , Tan SY, Appukutty M , Ab dul Razak N, 
Thielecke F, Hopkins S, O ng MK , Ning C &  Tee ES  (2015). Characteristics associated 
with the consum ption of malted drinks am ong M alaysian prim ary school children: 
findings from  the MyB reakfast study. BM C P ublic Health. 2015; 15: 1322. doi: 
10.1186/s12889-015-2666-5 
Kalantar-Zadeh K, Gutekunst L, Mehrotra R, Kovesdy CP , Bross R, Shinaberger CS, Noori N, 
Hirschberg R, Benner D, Nissenson AR & Kopple JD (2010). Understanding sources of 
dietary phosphorus in the treatment of patients with chronic kidney disease. Clin J Am 
Soc Nephrol 5:519-530. 
Katai K, Tanaka H, Tatsumi S, Fukunaga Y, Genjida K, Morita K,  Kuboyama N, Suzuki T, Akiba 
T, Miy am oto K, Takeda E (1999). Nicotinamide inhibits sodium dependent phosphate 
cotransport activity in rat small intestine. Nep hrol Dial Transplant 14:1195-1201. 
Kent GN, Price RJ, Gutteridge DH , Smith M, Allen JR, Bhagat CI, Branes M P , Hickling CJ, 
Retallack RW, Wilson SG, Devlin RD, Dav ies C &  St John A  (199 0). Human lactation; 
forearm trabecular bone loss, increased bone turnover and renal conservation of calcium 
and inorganic phosphate with recovery of bone mass following wea ning. J Bone Miner 
Res 5:361-369. 
Kent G N , Price RI, Gutteridge DH, Rosman KJ, Smith M, Allen JR, Hickling CJ & Blakeman SL 
(1991). The efficiency of intestinal calcium absorption is increased in late pregnancy but 
not in established lactation. Calcif Tissue Int 48:293-295. 
Lemann JJ (1996). Calcium and phosphate metabolism: an overview in health and in calcium 
stone formers. In: Kidney stones: medical and surgical ma nagem ent. E ds Coe FL, Favus 
MJ, Pak CY, Parks JH & Preminger GM . Lipincott-Raven Publishers, Philadelphia, PA, 
US A, pp 259-288 
León JB, Sullivan CM &  Sehgal AR  (2013). The prevalence of phosphorus-containing food 
additives in top-selling foods in grocery stores. J Ren Nutr 23(4): 265-270. 
Lotz M, Zisnma n E & Bartter FC (1968 ). Evidence for a phosphorus-depletion syndrom e in m an. 
N Engl J Med 278: 409-415. 
405 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Phosphorus 
M accubbin D, Tipping D, Kuznetsova O, Hanlon WA &  Bostom AG (2010). Hypophosphatemic 
effect of niacin in patients without renal failure: A  random ized trial. C lin J Am S oc 
N ephrol 5:582-589. 
Ma laysian Food Composi tion Database (M yFCD ). Fro m 
http://myfcd.moh.gov.my/index.php/compone nt/nutrient/. [Retrieved Nov 20 2016]. 
M artin KJ &  Gonzál ez EA  (201 1). Prevention and co ntrol o f phosphate 
retention/hyperphosphatemia in CKD-MB D: w hat is normal, w hen to start, and how  to 
treat? CJASN 6(2): 440-446. 
M oe SM (2008). Di sorders involving calcium , phosphorus, and mag nesium. Primary Care: 
Clinics in Office Practice 35: 215-237. 
M oe SM , Chen NX, Seifert MF, Sinders RM, D uan D, Chen X, Liang Y, Radcliff JS, White KE & 
G attone VH (2009). A rat model of chronic kidney disease-mineral bone disorder (CKD- 
M BD ) and The Effect of Dietary Protein Source. Kidney Int 75:176-184. 
M oshfegh A, Goldman J, Ahuja JK, Rhodes D & LaComb R (2009). Wha t we eat in A merica. 
N HA NES 2005-2006. In: Usual nutrient intakes from food and water compared to 199 7 
Dietary Reference Intake for vitamin D, calcium, phosphorus and m agnesium. 
U SD A/Agricultural Research Service. 
M oya M , Cortes E, Ballester MI, Vento M &  Juste M (1992). Short-term polycose substitution 
for lactose reduces calcium absorption in healthy term babies. J Pediatr Gastroenterol 
N utr 14:57-61. 
M uller D, Mehling H, Ot to B, Bergmann-Lips R, Luft F, Jordan J & Kettritz R (2007). Niacin 
lowers serum phosphate and increases HDL cholesterol in dialysis patients. Clin J Am 
Soc Nep hrol 2:1249-1254. 
N adkarni GN  & Uribarri J (2014). Phosphorus and the Kidney: Wha t Is Known and W hat Is 
N eeded. Adv. Nutr 5: 98-103. 
N ational Health and Medical Research Council (Australia & New Zealand). Ministry of Health 
A ustralia. Department of Health and Ageing. (2006). Nutrient reference values for 
A ustralia and New Zealand: including recommend ed dietary intakes. [Canberra, A.C.T: 
N ational Hea lth and M edical Research Counci l], 
http://www. nhm rc.gov.au/publications/_files/n35.pdf 
No ori N, Sims JJ, Kopple JD, Shah A, Colman S, Shinaberger CS, Bross R, Mehrotra R, Kovesdy 
CP &  Kalantar-Zadeh K (2010). Organic and inorganic dietary phosphorus and its 
m anagement in chronic kidney disease. Iran J Kidney Dis 4(2): 89-100. 
N ordin BEC (1989). Phosphorus. J Food Nutr 45: 62-75.  
406 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Phosphorus 
O’Brien KO, Kerstetter JE & Insogna KL (2014). Phosphorus. In: M odern Nutrition in Health and 
Disease. Eds Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL and Ziegler TR. Lippincott 
William s & Wilkins, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 150-158. 
O enning LL, Vogel J & Calvo MS  (1988). Accuracy of methods estimating calcium  and 
phosphorus intake in daily diets. J Am Diet Assoc 88:1076-1080. 
Penido MG  &  Alon US (2012). Phosphate homeostasis and its role in bone health. Pediatr 
Nephrol 27: 2039-2048. 
Petley A , Macklin B, Renwick AG  & Wilkin TJ (1995). The pharm acokinetics of nicotinamide in 
hum ans and rodents. Diabetes 44:152-155. 
Prentice A (2003). Micronutrients and the bone mineral content of the mother, fetus and 
new born. J Nutr 133: 1693S-1699S. 
Prentice A &  Bates CJ (1994). Adequacy of dietary mineral supply for human bone growth and 
mineralisation. Eur J Clin Nutr 48: S161-S176. 
Restrepo Valencia CA & C ruz J (2008). Safety and effectiveness of nicotinic acid in the 
ma nagement of patients with chronic renal disease and hyperlipidemia associated to 
hyperphosphatemia. Nefrologia 28: 61-66. 
Ritter CS  & Slatopolsky E (2016). Phosphate Toxicity in CKD: The Killer among us. Clin J Am 
Soc Nephrol 11(6):1088-1100. 
Sabbagh Y, Giral H, Caldas Y, Levi M & Schiavi SC (2011). Intestinal phosphate transport. Ad v 
Ch ronic Kidney Dis 18: 85-90. 
Sam pathkuma r K, Selvam M, Sooraj YS, Gowthaman  S & A jeshkumar RN (2006). Extended 
release nicotinic acid-a novel oral agent for phosphate control. Int Urol Nephrol 38:171- 
174. 
Schuette SA &  Linkswiler HM (1982). Effects on Ca and P metabolism in humans by adding 
meat, meat plus milk, or purified proteins plus Ca and P to a low protein diet. J Nutr 
112:338-349. 
Slemenda CW, Reister TK, Hui SL, Miller JZ, Christian JC & Johnston CC Jr (1994). Influences 
on skeletal mineralization in children and adolescents: evidence for varying effects of 
sexual maturation and physical activity. J Pediatr 125:201-207. 
Specker BL, Beck A , Kalkwarf H & Ho M (1997). Randomized trial of varying mineral intake on 
total body bone mineral accretion during the first year of life. Pediatrics 99:E12. 
Sullivan CM, Leon JB & S ehgal AR (2007). Phosphorus-containing food additives and the 
accuracy of nutrient databases: implications for renal patients. J Ren Nu tr 17: 350-354. 
407 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Phosphorus 
Takahashi Y, Tanaka A, Nakamura T, Fukuwatari T, Shibata K, Shimada N,  Ebihara I & Koide H 
(2004). Nicotinamide suppresses hyperphosphatemia in hemodialysis patients. Kidney 
Int 65:1099-1104. 
Takeda E, Yam amoto H, Yamanaka_ Okumu ra H & Taketani Y (2012). Dietary phosphorus in 
bone health and quality of life. Int Life Sci Inst Nutr R ev 70(6) 311-321. 
Uribarri J (2007).  Phosphorus home ostasis in norma l health and in chronic kidney disease 
patients with special emph asis on dietary phosphorus intake. Semin Dial 20(4): 295- 
301. 
U ribarri J & Calvo M S (2003). Hidden sources of phosphorus in the typical American diet: 
does it matter in nephrology? Sem in Dia l 16(3) 186- 188. 
W iddowson EM &  Spray CM (1951). Chemical development in utero. Arch Dis Childhood 26: 
205-214. 
W ilkinson R (1976). A bsorption of calcium , phosphorus, and mag nesium . In: Calcium, 
phosphate and magnesium metabolis m. E d N ordin BE C. Churchill Livingstone, 
Edinburgh, UK, 36-112. 
W illiams ML, Rose CS, Morrow G, Sloan SE & Barness LA  (1970). Calcium and fat absorption 
in neonatal period. Am J Clin Nutr 23:1322-1330. 
Ziegler EE & F omon SJ (1983). Lactose enhances mineral absorption in infancy. J Pediatr 
G astroenterol Nutr 2:228-294. 
408 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Phosphorus 
Age AI (m g/day) Age R N I (m g/day) 
M alaysia (201 7) 
Age AI (m g/day) 
EFSA (201 5) IO M  (2006 ) 
Appendix 22.1 : Com parison of recom m ended intake for Phosphorus: R N I M alaysia (201 7), R N I of EFSA (201 5) and AI of IO M  (2006 ) 
Infants (boys) 0 - 6 m onths 100 Infants (boys) 7 - 12 m onths 160 Infants (boys) 0 - 6 m onths 100 
7 - 12 m onths 275 7 - 12 m onths 275 
Infants (girls) 0 - 6 m onths 100 Infants (girls) 7 - 12 m onths 160 Infants (girls) 0 - 6 m onths 100 
7 - 12 m onths 275 7 - 12 m onths 275 
Children (boys) 1 - 3 years 460 Children (boys) 1 - 3 years 250 Children (boys) 1 - 3 years 460 
4 - 8  years 500 4 - 10 years 440 4 - 8  years 500 
Children (girls) 1 - 3 years 460 Children (girls) 1 - 3 years 250 Children (girls) 1 - 3 years 460 
4 - 8  years 500 4 - 10 years 440 4 - 8  years 500 
Adolescent (boys) 9  - 13 years 1250 Adolescent (boys) 11 - 17 years 640 Adolescent (boys) 9  - 13 years 1250 
14 - 18  years 1250 14 - 18  years 1250 
Adolescent (girls) 9  - 13 years 1250 Adolescent (girls) 11 - 17 years 640 Adolescent (girls) 9  - 13 years 1250 
14 - 18  years 1250 14 - 18  years 1250 
M en 19  - 29  years 700 M en 18  - 29   years 550 M en 19  - 29  years 700 
30 - 50 years 700 30 - 50 years 550 30 - 50 years 700 
51 - 59  years 700 51 - 59  years 550 51 - 59  years 700 
60 - 69  years 700 60 - 69  years 550 60 - 69  years 700 
> 70  years 700 > 70  years 550 > 70  years 700 
409 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Phosphorus 
W om en 19  - 29  years 700 W om en 18  - 29   years 550 W om en 19  - 29  years 700 
30 - 50 years 700 30 - 50 years 550 30 - 50 years 700 
51 - 59  years 700 51 - 59  years 550 51 - 59  years 700 
60 - 69  years 700 60 - 69  years 550 60 - 69  years 700 
> 70  years 700 > 70  years 550 > 70  years 700 
Pregnancy 14 - 18  years 1250 Pregnancy 14 - 18  years 640 Pregnancy 14 - 18  years 1250 
19  - 30 years 700 19  - 30 years 550 19  - 30 years 700 
31 - 50 years 700 31 - 50 years 550 31 - 50 years 700 
Lactation 14 - 18  years 1250 Lactation 14 - 18  years 640 Lactation 14 - 18  years 1250 
19  - 30 years 700 19  - 30 years 550 19  - 30 years 700 
31 - 50 years 700 31 - 50 years 550 31 - 50 years 700 
Age AI (m g/day) Age R N I (m g/day) 
M alaysia (201 7) 
Age AI (m g/day) 
EFSA (201 5) IO M  (2006 ) 
410 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
23 • Sodium 
23.1 Introduction 
Sodium is a chemical element with symbol Na and atomic number 11. It is a soft silver 
wh ite, highly reactive metal. It has a single electron in its outer shell that it readily donates, 
creating a positively charged atom-a cation. Its only stable isotope is 23 Na. The metal does not 
occur in nature, but must be prepared from compounds. Sodium is the sixth most abundant 
element in the earth’s crust and exists in numerous minerals such as feldspars, sodalite and rock 
salt (N acl). 
Sodium is found in most foods as sodium chloride (Na cl), generally known as ‘salt’ and 
1.0 g sodium is equivalent to 2.55 mg  NaCl while 1 mmol sodium  is equivalent to 23 mg sodium 
(NaCl consists of Na at 40 %), Thus, 1 teaspoon or 5 g salt provides 2000 m g or 88 mmo l 
sodium. In addition to NaCl, sodium may also be present in other forms, such as monosodium 
glutamate, sodium nitrate and sodium benzoate. (Food Act, 1983). Other form of sodium are 
food additives such as sodium phosphate and sodium carbonate. Sodium bicarbonate is used 
as an ingredients in food and can be used as a treatment of me tabolic acidosis .Still the major 
form of dietary sodium is sodium chloride. (IOM, 2004) 
23.2 Functions 
Sodium is the principal cation in extracellular fluid in the body and is an essential nutrient 
necessary for maintenance of plasma volume, acid-base balance, transm ission of nerve 
impulses and normal cell function (WHO, 2012). Sodium is the mo st important cation in 
regulation of fluid and electrolyte balance in the body due to its abundance and osmo tic 
pressure.  Since all body fluids are in chemical equilibrium, any change in sodium  levels causes 
a compensatory shift in water, affecting plasma volume, blood pressure and intracellular and 
interstitial volumes. 
The transmission of a nerve impulse along a neuron from one end to the other occurs 
as a result of electrical changes across the membrane of the neuron. The membr ane of an 
unstimulated neuron is polarized-that is, there is a difference in electrical charge between the 
outside and inside of the membrane. The inside is negative with respect to the outside. 
Polarization is established by maintaining an excess of sodium ions (Na  +) on the outside and 
an excess of potassium ions (K +) on the inside. A certain amount of Na + and K + is always 
leaking across the membrane through leakage channels, but Na +/K + pumps in the membrane 
actively restore the ions to the appropriate side. The main contribution to the resting membrane 
potential (a polarized nerve) is the difference in permeability of the resting m em brane to 
potassium ions versus sodium ions. The resting membrane is m uch m ore perm eable to 
potassium ions than to sodium ions resulting in slightly more net potassium ion diffusion (from 
the inside of the neuron to the outside) than sodium ion diffusion (from the outside of the 
neuron to the inside) causing the slight difference in polarity right along the membrane  of the 
axon. Other ions, such as large, negatively charged proteins and nucleic acids, reside w ithin the 
cell. It is these large, negatively charged ions that contribute to the overall negative charge on 
the inside of the cell membrane as compared to the outside.In addition to crossing the 
membr ane through leakage channels, ions may cross through gated channels. Gated channels 
open in response to neurotransmitters, changes in mem brane potential, or other stimuli 
(cliffnotes.com)  Figure 23.1 below show the events that characterize the transmission of a nerve 
impulse. 
411 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Sod ium 
Figure 23.1. Events that characterize the transmission of a nerve impulse. 
Source: cliffsnotes.com 
23.3 M etabolism 
D ietary sodium is virtually completely absorbed along the length of the intestine and the 
active transport of sodium is closely linked to the wider ability of the sma ll intestine to absorb 
other nutrients (EFSA, 2006). In healthy Individual, nearly 100% of ingested sodium is absorbed 
during digestion, and urinary excretion is the primary mechanism for maintaining sodium 
balance. Even in hot humid climates, there are only minimal loses through faeces and sweat. 
A cclimation to heat occurs rapidly; thus, within a few days of exposure to hot and humid 
conditions, individuals lose only small amounts of sodium through sweat. Under conditions of 
extreme heat and intense physical activity that result in high swe at production, sodium losses 
in sw eat are increased and appreciable; nonetheless, most individuals can replace the necessary 
sodium through food consumption, without dietary alterations, supplemen ts of specially 
form ulated products (WHO, 2012). 
There are various system and hormo nes that influence sodium and chloride balance. 
These include the renin-angiostensin-aldosterone axis, the sympathetic nervous system, atrial 
natriuretic peptide (ANP), the kallikrein-kinin system, various intrarenal mechanisms and other 
factor’s that regulate renal and medullary blood flow. Angiostensin II, a potent vasoconstrictor, 
regulates the proximal tubule of nephron to promote sodium and chloride retention and also 
stimulate the release of aldosterone from the adrenal cortex. Aldosterone promotes the renal 
reabsorption of sodium in the distal tubule of nephron by mineralocorticoid receptor-mediated 
exchange for hydrogen and potassium ions. With reduced salt intake, reduced blood volume, 
or reduced blood pressure, the renin angiostensin-aldosterone axis is stimulated. Wh en the 
0
-100
-50
0
50
1234567
hyperpolarizationresting potential
threshold potential
depolarization
Membrane Potential (mV)
resting potential
repolarization
action
potential
refractory
period
412 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Sod ium 
renin-angiostensin-aldosterone system is less responsive, as with advancing age, there is a 
greater blood pressure reduction from a reduced intake of sodium chloride. 
AN P is released in response to elevated blood volume and serves as a counter-regulatory 
system to the renin-angiostensin-aldosterone system. ANP decreases the release of renin and 
therefore the release of angiostensin II and aldosterone and increases the glomerular filtration 
rate. These action contribute to reductions in blood volum e and blood pressure. The 
sympa thetic nervous system is another major regulatory system for sodium and chloride 
excretion through at least three mechanism s alteration in renal medullary blood low, release of 
renin, direct effects on the renal tubules. Similar to the renin-angiostensin-aldosterone system , 
the sympathetic nervous system is activated during sodium depletion and suppressed during 
sodium excess. With Increased extracellular fluid volume, there is a decreased sodium 
concentration of the fluid delivered to the ascending limb of Henle’s loop in the renal tubule. This 
decrease leads to reduced sodium reabsorption of the kidney’s nephron so that more sodium 
is delivered to the distal tubules for excretion. Intrarenal mecha nisms include locally released 
prostaglandins, kinins, angiostensin, endothelial relaxing factor and other less well defined 
factors (IOM , 2004). 
Admi nistration of potassium salts has been shown to increase urinary sodium excretion. 
In N ormal human volunteers studied under controlled metabolic conditions, both potassium 
bicarbonate and potassium chloride have demonstrated substantial and compara ble effects on 
increasing urinary sodium excretion, at least until equilibrium is reached. At a new steady state, 
sodium intake and excretion become equivalent. Anima l experiment suggest that potassium 
ma y inhibit sodium reabsorption in the distal tubule of the kidney. By reducing extracellular 
volume and plasm a volume, this effect is generally considered to be important of the 
antihypertensive effect of potassium, particularly in patients with hypertension A substantial 
body of evidence has docume nted that higher intakes of sodium result in increased urinary 
excretion of calcium . Data on effect of calcium intake on sodium  excretion, however are limited 
(IO M, 2004) 
23.4 Sources 
Sodium is found naturally in a variety of foods, such as milk, meat and shellfish. It is often 
found in high amo unts in processed foods such as breads, crackers, processed meats and 
snacks foods. High amounts of sodium are also found in many condiments (e.g soy and fish 
sauces), thus, a diet high in processed foods and low in fresh fruits and vegetables is often 
high in sodium (WHO, 2012). 
Both the study on sodium intake among health staff in 2015( My Salt, 2015) and 2012 
found that light soy sauce was the most popular seasoning consumed daily which contributed 
to the highest daily sodium intake. Fried rice, omelette, nasi lemak, thick soy sauce, roti canai, 
meat soups and fried mee were also major sources of sodium, followed by oyster sauce, and 
toma to/chilli sauce. Mo st sources of sodium in the diet we re ma inly contributed by cooked 
food (grain products), sauces/seasonings, meat & meat products, fish/seafood products, fast 
foods, eggs ,cooked foods (others), snacks, local kuih-muih ,canned foods and spreads, (IPH, 
2016). 
413 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Sod ium 
M alaysian A dult Nutrition survey (MANS , 2014) showed  that foods sources of high 
sodium content mostly came from local kuih (79% ), breads(76.9%), mee hoon, kueh teow, 
laksa, laksam, lohsi fun(76%), ketchup (75.6%) and followed by mee (75.2%).The list of 
sources and content of sodium in selected foods in Malaysia are listed in Table 23.1. 
Table 23.1: Sodium  content of foods 
Cereal And Cereal Product 
N oodle snack,flavoured 613 mg 
Rice porridge,instant 467 mg 
Bread ,white 340 mg 
Bread,wholemeal 311 mg 
Biscuits, cream crackers [7 pcs] 110 mg 
N oodle, Instant 103 mg 
Rice,plain, cooked 6 mg 
Starchy Roots, Tubers & Product 
Potato chip [12 pieces] 712 mg 
Potato [2 whole] 33 mg 
Legumes & Legumes P roducts 
Soya bean paste,fermented [1 tablespoon] 7299 mg 
Soya sauce’thick’ 2807mg 
Soya bean cake,fermented 7 mg 
N ut, Seeds &  Products 
W atermelon seeds, dried, black [3 cups] 358 mg 
Vegetables  & Vegetables Products 
Seaweed,dried [Half cup] 2025 mg 
Cabbage,chinese,salted [1 tablespoon] 1863 mg 
Peas,salted,fried. [1 cup] 414 mg 
Fruits & Fruits Products 
Fruits, mixed, spicy pickled [1 tablespoon] 1488 mg 
D urian fermented [2 tablespoon] 577 mg 
M eat & Poultry Products 
Beef rendang,canned [Half cup] 507 mg 
M utton curry,canned [Half cup] 424 mg 
Beef burger,regular [1 whole] 416 mg 
Chicken frankfurter [2 pieces] 283 mg 
Beef frankfurter[12x2cm] [2 pieces] 281 mg 
M utton,lean,raw [1 cup] 91 mg 
Food Sources mg/100g 
414 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Sod ium 
Chicken,breast meat [1 cup] 42 mg 
Chicken,thigh [2 medium] 42 mg 
Fish, Shellfish & Products 
Fish sauce [Quarter tablespoon] 6329 mg 
Shrimp,fermented [Half tablespoon] 4485 mg 
A nchovy,dried [Quarter cup] 3969 mg 
Prawn,salted,dried [1 tablespoon] 2554 mg 
Prawn paste [1 tablespoon] 1742 mg 
Fish ball 665 mg 
Shrimp paste [Half piece] 1430 mg 
Cuttlefish,fried[1 whole,small] 1038 mg 
Prawn crackers [1 small packet] 750mg 
Fish crackers, fried [5 pieces] 736 mg 
Cuttlefish crackers [1 large packet] 527 mg 
Sardine,canned [1 small can] 307 mg 
Bream,threadfin [1 whole] 246 mg 
Carp,common 67 mg 
M ackerel,Spanish [1 slice] 73 mg 
M ilk & Milk Products 
Cheese,processed,cheddar [1 slice] 1452 mg 
O ils & Fats 
Chili sauce [1 tablespoon] 1144 mg 
Butter [2 tablespoons] 609 mg 
M argerine [3 tablespoons] 384 mg 
Food Sources m g/100g 
Source: My FCD, (1997 FCD) 
Sodium  content in different types of salt 
Regardless of the cost, whether it comes in crystals or grains, from the sea or from the 
Himalayas, a new Consensus Action On salt and Health (CASH) in UK survey has found they all 
contain an equally high sodium chloride content as table and cooking salt.Garlic salt and celery 
salt are also popular alternatives to standard table salt. These products are made predominantly 
of table, rock or sea salt combined with small amounts of dried garlic or celery. The salt 
com ponent is still sodium chloride so these too should be limited as with rock and sea salt 
(W ASH , 2017). A market survey of sodium content and nutrient compos ition in a few types of 
salt in Malaysia is shown in Table 23.2. 
415 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Sod ium 
Table 23.2: Nutrients composition in different type of salts in Malaysia 
Nutrient composition /100 gm 
Type Of Salt 
Regular  
Single 
Refined 
R ock Salt 
Natural, 
Him alayan 
Pink Rock 
Salt 
Pure 
R ock 
Salt 
Sodium chloride – NaCl (dry weight basis) 97.0% 98.68% 99.9% 
Sulfate (Ca SO4) %0.5Max 0.7% 
Potassium(K) 0.14% 0.19% 
Calcium (Ca) 0.07% 0.04% 
Calcium Chloride & Magnesium Chloride (CaCl2 & MgC12) 0.25% 
M agnesium(Mg) 0.07% 0.08% 
Iron (fe) 2.5ppm 2.88 mg/kg 
Copper(cu) 0.85 ppm 0.93 mg/kg 
M anganese 1.5 ppm 
Zinc(Zn) 3.98 mg/kg 
Selenium (se) 10.15 mg/kg 
Insoluble matter (in cold water) %0.1max 
Source: Viola Michael (Personal Comm unication) 2017 
Salt substitute are referred to as light salts, in which all or some of the sodium is replaced 
w ith other mineral such as potassium o r mag nesium (Food Act, 1983 ) Salt substitute  like 
potassium salt have up to 70% less sodium than standard table salt so do not carry the same 
high risks as sodium based salts (W ASH,2016). Iodised Salt is a form of salt that has been 
fortified w ith iodine. It contains 20 to 30 ppm or 20 to 30 mg iodine per kg of salt (FAO, 1995). 
Low -salt, very low salt and salt free food  are defined as food with sodium concentration not 
m ore than 0.12g/100g, 0.04 g/100g, 0.005 g/100 g, respectively, and 1 mmol sodium = 23 mg 
sodium, 1 gram of sodium chloride (salt) contains 390 mg (17 mmol) of sodium. (Food Act, 
1983) 
23.5 Excess 
D ata obtained from 24-hour urine analysis is considered as the “gold standard” or 
m ethod used by World Health Organization (WH O)  to estimate sodium intake in the population. 
O ther method used are 24 hours dietary recall and spot urinary sodium  analysis. 
A ccording to Powles et al. (2013), in 2010 the estimated mean intake of sodium in 181 
out of 187 countries which consisted 99.2 % of the world adult population exceeded the WHO 
recommen dation of 2.00 g/day sodium or 5 gram of salt per day. Asian regions had the highest 
416 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Sod ium 
mean sodium intake where Central Asia recorded intake of 5.51 g per day or (14.01 gram of 
salt), followed by Asia Pacific High income countries mainly Japan and South Korea with mean 
sodium intake of 5 gram per day or 12.71 gram salt and East As ia with  mea n sodium  intake 
of 4.8 gram per day or 12.21 gram of salt.  
A  recent local study, M y Salt, 2015 using the 24 hours urinary sodium am ong 1027 
health staff in Malaysia showed that, the mean sodium intake was 2860 mg or 7.15g salt per 
day (IPH, 2016). There was a reduction of sodium intake compared to the pilot study w hich w as 
done among 445 health staff in 2012 which show ed an average intake of 3.4 gm/day sodium 
or 8.7 gram  of salt per day. Data obtained through dietary surveys generally tend to 
underestimate sodium intakes, as compared to data obtained from 24-hour urine analysis. The 
mean sodium intake among health staff in 2012, 2015 and Malaysian Adult Nutrition Survey 
(M AN S, 2003, MANS, 2014) is shown in Table 23.3. 
Table 23.3: Mean sodium intake in Malaysia using different methods of sodium analysis. 
M ean sodium intake per day by different methods. 
N ame of study Sample 
size (n) 
24 hours 
urinary 
sodium 
analysis 
(mg/day) 
Sam ple 
size (n) 
24 hours 
dietary 
survey 
sodium 
(m g/day) 
Sampl e 
size (n) 
Spot 
urinary 
sodium 
analysis 
(m g/day) 
M y Salt 2015 (IPH, 2016) 1027 2860 1096 2761 1013 2383 mg 
Pilot study among health staff in 2012 
(Rashidah et.al, 2014) 445 3429 445 2372 
M ANS  2014 (NHMS, 2014) - 3880 1935 -
M ANS  2003 Mirnalini et al. (2008) - 6886 2575 -
D ata on sodium intake among children and adolescents is very limited. A Coh ort study 
consisting of 794 adolescents, aged 13 years (attending 15 public schools from  the Central (Kuala 
- Lump ur and Selangor) and Northern (Perak) Regions of Peninsular Mal aysia using a 7 days 
historical assessment of habitual food intakes showed that  sodium intake was (2289.5 mg/day) 
which exceeded the recommendation by WHO (Abdul Majid et al., 2016). 
Reducing sodium intake significantly reduced systolic and diastolic blood pressure in adults 
and children. The reduction in blood pressure was detected across a w ide range of intake levels, 
and was independent of baseline sodium intake. Reducing sodium intake to <2 g/day was more 
beneficial for blood pressure than reducing sodium intake but still consuming > 2 g/day. Reducing 
sodium intake had no significant adverse effect on blood lipids, catecholamine levels in renal 
function. 
Higher sodium intake was associated with higher risk of incident of stroke, fatal stroke and 
fatal coronary heart disease. There w as no association between sodium intake and all cause 
mo rtality, incident cardiovascular disease and non-fatal coronary heart disease. However, the 
417 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Sod ium 
strong positive relationship between blood pressure and these outcom es provides indirect 
evidence that reducing sodium intake can improve these outcomes through a beneficial effect on 
blood pressure. (WHO, 2012) 
Higher sodium intake is also linked with stomach cancer. A m eta-analysis of 7 prospective 
studies, involving 270,000 individuals who w ere followed up over 6-15 years, showed that those 
w ith high salt/sodium intake had a 68% higher risk of developing gastric cancer than those with 
low intake (D ‘Elia et al., 2012). Similiarly, a 2007 meta-analysis of cohort studies found that for 
every gram of salt intake per day, the risk of developing stoma ch cancer increased by 8% (W CRF, 
2007). 
The prevalence of hypertension in Malaysia is currently at 30.3% in adult age 18 years and 
above. Based on the latest age-standardised adjusted estimates published by WHO, Malay sia’s 
prevalence of high BP is higher compared to Singapore and Thailand. Based on Malaysia’s latest 
Burden of Disease Study published in 2014, high blood pressure is estimated to cause 42.2% of 
deaths and 21.6 % of Disability-adjusted life years (DALY), the largest contributor for both men 
and women (MO H, 2015) Figure 23.2 shows the prevalence of hypertension in Malaysia. 
Prevalence of Hypertension, >18 years
NHMS 2006, 2011, 2015
Prevalence (%)
0
35
NHMS III (2006)
32.2
NHMS 2011 N HMS 2015
30
25
20
15
10
5
32.7
12.8 13.1
19.8 19.8
30.3
Total HPT
Undiagnosed
Known
Figure 23.2: Prevalence of Hypertension in Malaysia (NHMS 2006-2015)  
(Source: NHMS 2015) 
The prevalence of Hypertension amon g children and adolescent were found to be 
increasing in Malaysia. A study from Sabah, Malaysia has reported that the prevalence of 
hypertension among children aged 8-9 years old was 14% (Chong, So o & R asat, 2012). 
Sim ilarly, a study by Rampal et al (2010) among 1778 M alay adolescents in Putrajaya Secondary 
Schools showed that the prevalence of pre-hypertension and hypertension amo ng male and 
female was 16.2 % and 12.9 %, and 5.8% and 10.2 %, respectively. The overall prevalence of 
prehypertension and hypertension was 11.1 % and 11.6 %, respectively. 
418 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Sod ium 
The minimum intake level of sodium necessary for proper bodily function is not well 
defined. It is estimated to be as little as 200-500 mg/day. Data around the world suggest that 
the population average sodium consumption is well above the m inimal physiological needs and 
in many countries is above the value recommended by the Joint World Health Organization/Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (WHO/FAO, 2002) Ex pert consultation of 2g 
sodium/day or equivalent to 5 g salt/day. 
Decr eased sodium intake results in reduced blood volume and thus activates the renin- 
angiotensin- aldosterone and sympathetic nervous systems which help to control blood volum e 
(W HO , 2012) 
23.6 Factors Affecting Sodium  Requirements. 
Indicators that have been used for assessing the need for sodium  include Sodium 
balance, urine and faeces, skin and sweat, chloride balance, serum or plasma concentration, 
plasma  renin activity, and blood lipid concentration. When substantial sweating does not occur, 
total obligatory sodium losses are very small, up to 0.18g/day or 8mmol/day (Table 23.4). For 
this reason, in a temperate climate or even a tropical climate, acclimatized persons can survive 
on extremely low sodium intake. 
Table 23.4:  Obligatory losses of sodium 
g/d m mol/day 
U rine 0.005-0.035 0.2-1.5 
Skin (non sweating) 0.025 1.1 
Faeces 0.010-0.125 0.4-5.4 
Total 0.040-0.185 1.7-8.0 
Source: DHAL (1958) 
In non sweating individuals living in a tempe rate climate who are in a steady - state of 
sodium and fluid balance, urinary sodium excretion is approxima tely equal to sodium intake (90 
to 95 percent of total intake is excreted in urine). Obligatory urinary losses of sodium in adults 
are approximately 23 mg (1mm ol)/day. Excretion of sodium in the stool is minimal. W hen 
sodium intakes ranged from 0.05 to 4.1g/day of sodium, only about 0.01 to 0.125 g (0.4 to 5.4 
mmol/day) appeared in the stool. Still faecal excretion of sodium was less than 5 percent of 
intake even at the highest level of sodium intake (IOM, 2004). Daily dermal losses of sodium 
have been reported to average less than 0.025 g (1.1mmol/day). Swea t sodium loss depends 
on a num ber of factors, including the sweat rate, sodium intake and heat acclimation. For these 
reasons, the sodium concentration in sweat varies widely. Healthy persons swe ating 5 to 9 
L/day could maintain sodium chloride balance on intakes ranging from as low  as 1.9  g (83 
mm ol/day) to 3.2g (139mmol/day) of sodium chloride, the maximu m  intake provided. In 
aggregate available data indicated that healthy, free living individuals can achieve sodium 
balance following acclimation under a variety of conditions, including low sodium intake and 
extreme heat (IOM, 2004) 
419 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Sod ium 
Chloride losses usually accomp any sodium losses. Hence conditions and diseases in 
w hich sodium is lost are likewise associated with chloride loss. Excess chloride depletion 
m arked by hypochloremia, results in hypochloremis metabolic alkalosis in which loss of 
hydrochloric is the primary form of chloride loss (IOM, 2004). 
Changes in sodium intake can influence serum or plasma levels of sodium , but the 
changes are relatively small and do not lead to pathological conditions, such as hyponatremia. 
W hen observed, hyponatremia is often caused by excessive sodium loss from the body, which 
occurs w ith impaired renal function, increased vasopressin release, or excessive consumption 
of water. Diuretic use is an infrequent cause of hyponatremia. Renin is released from the 
juxtaglomerular cells of the kidney response to a perceived reduction in blood volume, blood 
pressure, or tubular sodium concentration. As a result, renin induces the production of 
angiotensin 11, w hich stimulates renal sodium reabsorption via a direct tubular effect, as well 
as by increasing the production of aldosterone. Elevation in blood pressure (IOM, 2004). Several 
trials on the effects of reduced sodium intake on blood lipid concentration showed that it will 
increase the total and low density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol concentration (IOM, 2004). 
23.7 Setting Requirements and Recom mended Intakes of Sodium 
Based on the entire body of evidence, WHO (2012) recomme nds a reduction in sodium 
intake to reduce blood pressure and risk of cardiovascular disease, stroke and coronary heart 
disease in adults. For adults, WHO  recommends a reduction of < 2 g/day sodium (5 g/day). For 
children, WHO recommends a reduction in sodium  intake to control blood pressure. The 
recom men ded maximum level of intake of 2 g/day sodium  in adults should be adjusted 
dow nwa rd based on the energy requireme nt of children relative to those of adults (WHO, 2012). 
This recommendati on applies to all individuals with or without hypertension including 
pregnant or lactating women, except for individuals with illnesses or taking drug therapy that 
m ay lead to hyponatraemia or acute build-up of body water, or require physician- supervised 
diets (e.g. patients with heart failure and those with type 1 diabetes). In these subpopulations, 
they may  be a particular relationship between sodium intake and the health outcomes of interest. 
For this recom men dation adults includes individuals >16 years of age and children includes 
individuals 2-15 years of age inclusive. The recommenda tion for children does not address the 
recomm ended period of excusive breastfeeding (0-6) month or the period of complementary 
feeding with continued breastfeeding (6-24 months) (WHO, 2012). 
Because of insufficient data from dose response trials, an E stimated Average 
Requirement (EAR) could not be established, thus Recomm ended Dietary Allowance could not 
be derived, hence an Adequate Intake (AI) is provided. 
Technical Sub-comm ittee (TSC) on mineral & traces of elements decided to adapt the 
IOM  (2006) recommendation for sodium. 
For the prevention and control of Non Communic able Diseases, the TSC on mineral & 
traces of elements is agreeable to the current recommen dation by WHO (2012) which was 
based on the maximum level of 2 g/ day sodium for adult and for children it should be adjusted 
dow nward based on the energy requirement). Anyw ay, since this was not clearly stated based 
420 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Sod ium 
on age range and was not stated in any proper reference, with justification the TSC decided to 
adapt to the IOM (2006) for the recommendation of sodium which is stated in AI (Table 23.5) 
and still below the recommendation of 2 gram sodium per day for all the age range. It is worth 
noting that even the earliest recommendation by SCAN in 2003 stated that the RNI for sodium 
in adult should be 1600 mg/day. 
Table 23.5:  Sodium  requirement (AI mg/ day) for all age group 
Sodium  Requirem ent (AI mg/day) 
Infants 
0 - 6 months 120 mg/day (5 mmol/day) 
7 - 12 months 370 mg/day (16 mmol/day) 
Children & adolescents 
1 - 3 yr 1000 mg/day (42 mmol/day) 
4 - 8 yr 1200 mg/day (53 mmol/day) 
9 - 13 yr 1500 mg/day (65 mmol/day) 
14 - 18 yr 1500 mg/day (65 mmol/day) 
Adults 
M en 1500 mg/day (65 mmol/day) 
W omen 1500 mg/day (65 mmol/day) 
>70 yr 1200 mg/day (53 mmol/day) 
Pregnancy 
14 - 18 yr 1500 mg/day (65 mmol/day) 
19 - 30 yr 1500 mg/day (65 mmol/day) 
31 - 50 yr 1500 mg/day (65 mmol/day) 
Lactation 
14 - 18 yr 1500 mg/day (65 mmol/day) 
19 - 30 yr 1500 mg/day (65 mmol/day) 
31 - 50 yr 1500 mg/day (65 mmol/day) 
Source:  IOM 2006 
23.8 Tolerable Upper Intake Levels 
The scientific rationale for setting the Tolerable Upper intake levels should be based on 
the adverse effects of higher levels of sodium intake on blood pressure in adults and children. 
The low est  observed adverse effect level (LOAEL) for the dietary sodium is set at 2.3 g/day (100 
m mo l/day) based on a preliminary three trials in which the lowe st level of dietary sodium intake 
wa s close to the AI (M acgregor et al., 1989; Sacks et al., 2001). W hen dietary sodium  was 
provided at the average level of 1.2 g (50 mmol)/day, blood pressure was significantly less than 
Age m g/day (mm ol) 
421 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Sod ium 
w hen the target average sodium intake was 2.3 g (100 mmol/day. It is recognized that the term 
LOA EL  as applied to dietary sodium is a point on a continuous relationship with blood pressure, 
a point that correspondents to the next level above the AI that was tested in dose-response 
trials. As with other nutrients, a no observed adverse effect level (NOAE L) would have been 
preferable. However in the setting of a progressive, dose-response relationship without a 
threshold, a NOA EL  cannot be set. Note that the UL is not a recommende d intake. As with other 
U Ls, there is no apparent benefit to consuming levels above the AI. The UL recommenda tion 
based on age range is shown below. 
U L for sodium 
Infants 
0 - 12 months Not possible to establish. Source of intake should be through breast 
m ilk, formula and food only. 
1 - 3 year 1000 mg/day(43 mmol) 
4 - 8 yr 1,400 mg/day(60 mmol) 
9 - 13 yr 2000 mg/day(86 mmol) 
14 - 18 yr 2300 mg/day(100 mmol) 
Adults 19 + yr 
M en 2300 mg/day(100 mmol) 
W omen 2300 mg/day(100 mmol) 
422 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Sod ium 
23.9 Research Recomm endations 
The Technical subcom mittee identified a numb er of data gaps or lack of evidence in 
relation to mean sodium intake for population, database on sodium content in foods, adverse 
effect of lowering sodium intake and association between sodium intake and other diseases or 
condition as stated below. 
i) Dat a on salt (sodium) intake using the 24 hours urinary sodium  which is the Go ld 
Standard as recommen ded by WHO is very limited in Malaysia. The available data is only 
confined from data of a few specific group such as the salt intake among MOH staff and 
a few other studies among urban poor and University students which is still unpublished. 
All these data are not representing the population salt intake and can only be used as a 
proxy to develop any programs for salt (sodium) recomme ndation. 
A population based study using the 24hours urinary sodium is very mu ch needed to 
help to provide novel and valuable data for the sodium /salt recomm endation in Malaysia. 
ii)  There is a need for sodium to be mandatory labelled in all processed foods in Malaysia 
for the purpose of educating the public and m onitoring the content of sodium in all 
processed foods. Research or market survey on the current status of sodium labelling 
need to be done to accelerate the process of labelling. 
iii) In addition to RCT Research, mechanistic studies are needed to examine the potential 
physiological changes associated with lowering sodium  intake and adverse health 
outcomes. 
iv) Finally, additional observational research is needed to exam ine associations between 
sodium intake and cancer, especially gastric cancer, as w ell as association between 
sodium  intake and caloric intake in both short- term and longitudinal studies. 
423 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Sod ium 
23.10 R eferences 
Ab dul Majid H, Ramli L, Ying SP , Su TT, Jalaludin M Y, Abd ul M ohsein NA-S  (2016). Dietary 
Intake amo ng Adolescents in a Middle - Incom e Country: An outcom e from the Malaysian 
health and adolescents longitudinal  research team study (The MY HeARTs Study). Plos 
O N E 11(5);e0155447doi.10.1371/journal.pone.0155447. 
Chong HL, Soo TL, Rasat R (2012). Childhood obesity - Prevalence among 7 and 8 year old 
prim ary school students in Kota Kinabalu. Med J Mal 2012; 67:147_50. 
cliffsnotes.com. The events that characterize the transm ission of a nerve impulse. 
https://www. cliffsnotes.com/ study-guides/anatomy-an d-physiology/nervou s-tissue/ 
transmission-of-nerve-impulses (retrieved 21 March 2017) 
D ahl LK (1958). Salt intake and salt need. N England J Med 258:1152-1156 
D ’Elia L Rossi G, Ippolito R, Cappuccio FP , Strazzullo P (2012). Habitual salt intake and risk of 
gastric cancer: a meta-analysis of prospective studies. Clin Nutr 2012. Available online: 
30th January 2012 
EFS A (2006). Tolerable Upp er Intake Levels for Vitamins and Minerals. Europe an Food Safety 
A uthority Scientific Committee on Food, Scientific Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition 
and Allergies. 
FAO  (19 9 5). Technical Cons ultation on Food Fortification: Technology and Quality Control, 
Food and Agriculture Organization Rome, 20-23 November 1995. 
Frank M . Sacks, Laura P . Svetkey,  W illiam M. Vollmer, Lawrence J. Appel, George A. Bray, 
D avid Harsha, Eva Obarzanek, Paul R. Conlin, Edgar R. Miller, Denise G. Simons-Morton, 
N jeri Karanja, Pao-Hwa Lin, Mikel Aickin, M arlene M . Mo st-Windhauser,Thom as J. 
M oore, Michael A. Proschan, and Jeffrey A. Cutler, for the DASH-Sodium Collaborative 
Research Group (2001). Effects on Blood Pressure of Reduced Dietary Sodium and the 
D ietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DAS H) Diet N Engl J Med 2001; 344:3-10, 
January 4, 2001DOI: 10.1056/NEJM200101043440101 
Institute for Public Health (2008). The Third National Health and M orbidity Survey 2006. 
M inistry of Health, Malaysia. 
Institute for public Health (2011). National He alth and Mor bidity Survey 2011- Non 
Commu nicable Disease (Vol.11). Mi nistry of Health, Malaysia. 
Institute for Public Health (2013). Research Technical Report. Es timating Dietary Sodium Intake 
am ong Ministry of Health Staff. A Pilot Study 
Institute for public Health (2015). National He alth and Mor bidity Survey 2011- Non 
Commu nicable Disease (Vol. 11). Ministry of Health, Malaysia. 
424 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Sod ium 
Institute for Public Health (2016). Determination of dietary sodium intake among the Ministry 
of Health staffs (My Salt 2015). Mi nistry of Health, Malaysia 
IOM (2004). Dietary reference intakes for water, potassium, sodium, chloride, and sulphate. 
Institute of Medicine, National Academies Press, Washington, DC. 
IOM (2005). Dietary (DRI) Reference Intakes. The Essential Guide to Nutrients Requirements. 
Institute of Medicine, National Academy Press, Washington, DC. 
IOM (2006). Dietary Reference Intakes: The Essential Guide to Nutrient Requirem ents. J. J. 
Ot ten, J. P . Hellw ig and L. D. Meyers. Institute of Medicine, National Acad emy of 
Sciences, Washington D.C. 
IOM (2013). Sodium Intake in populations: Assessment of evidence. Institute of Medicine: The 
National Academy Press, Washington DC. 
L Ramp al*, KC Ng, I Nur Izzati, Z Farah Izzati, I Mohammad Nazrul, I Faisal, SY Sharifah Zainiyah 
(2010). Prevalence of Hypertension among Malay adolescents in Putrajaya Secondary 
Schools, Mal J Med & Health Sc Vol. 7 (2) June 2011: 53-60 
NC CFN  (2010). Ma laysian Dietary Guidelines, National Coordinating Committee on Food and 
Nutrition, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya.. 
Malaysian Food Act 1983(Act 281) & Regulations (as of 1st March, 2014) 
Malaysian Food Com position  Da tabase (My FCD), Brow se listing from The Malay sian Food 
Comp osition Database 1997. http://myfcd.moh.gov.m y 
M inistry of Health, Salt Reduction Strategy To Prevent and control NCD  for M alaysia(2015- 
2020). 
Ma cG regor GA, Markandu ND, Sagnella GA, Singer DRJ, Cappucio FP ,(1989); Double blind 
study of three sodium  intake and long term effects of sodium restriction in essential 
hypertension, Lancet 2:1244-1247. 
Ministry of Health (2015).Salt Reduction Strategy To Prevent And Control NCDFor Malays ia, 
2015-2020. Disease Control Division, NCD Sec tion (ISBN978- 967-0769-52-3) 
Mirnalini K. Zalilah MS,Safiah MY,Tahir A. Siti Haslinda MD. Siti Rohana D,Khairul Zarina MY, 
Mohd Hasyami S &  Normah H (2008).Energy and Nutrient Intakes: Findings from the 
Malay sian Adult Nutrition Survey (MANS) Mal J Nutr 14(1):1-24 
N ational Health and M orbidity Survey (2014): Malaysian Adult Nutrition Survey (MANS). 
Institute Of Public Health, National Institutes of Health, Min istry Of  Health Malaysia. 
Volume 11; Survey Findings. ISBN; 978-983-2387-11-4 
425 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Sod ium 
Pow les J, Fahimi S,Micha R,Khatibzadeh S, Shi P , Ezza ti M ,Engell RE, Lim SS,  D anaei G, 
M ozaffarian D  G lobal,regional and national sodium  intakes in 199 0 and 2010: a 
systema tic analysis of 24 h urinary sodium excretion and dietary surveys worldwide. 
BMJ  Open 2013;3:e003733.doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2013- 003733 
Rashidah et al.2014.Sodium intake among  norm otensive health staff assessed by 24-hour 
urinary excretion: a cross sectional study. Mal J. Nutr. 20(3):317-326. 
SACN  (2003). Salt and Health. Scientific Advisory Comm ittee on Nutrition. 
Viola Michael (2017). Nu trients comp osition in different type of salts in Malaysia (Personal 
Commu nication) 
W HO (2012), Guideline: Sodium Intake for adults and children. Wo rld Health Organization 
(W HO ), Geneva. 
WC RF (2007). Panel on Food, Nutrition, Physical Activity, and the Prevention of Cancer: A 
G lobal Perspective. World Cancer Research Fund: Washington, DC 
WA SH (2017). Salt and your health. World Action on Salt and Health 
426 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Sod ium 
Age AI (m g/day) Age R N I (m g/day) 
M alaysia 201 7 
Age AI (m g/day) 
SACN  2003 IO M  2006 
Appendix 23.1 : Com parison of recom m ended intake for Sodium : R N I of M alaysia (201 7), SACN  (2003) and AI of IO M  (2006 ) 
Infants (boys) 0 - 6 m onths 120 Infants (boys) 0 - 3 m onths 210 Infants (boys) 0 - 6 m onths 120 
7 - 12 m onths 370 4 - 6 m onths 28 0 7 - 12 m onths 370 
7 - 9  m onths 320 
10 - 12 m onths 350 
Infants (girls) 0 - 6 m onths 120 Infants (girls) 0 - 3 m onths 210 Infants (girls) 0 - 6 m onths 120 
7 - 12 m onths 370 4 - 6 m onths 28 0 7 - 12 m onths 370 
7 - 9  m onths 320 
10 - 12 m onths 350 
Children (boys) 1 - 3 years 1000 Children (boys) 1 - 3 years 500 Children (boys) 1 - 3 years 1000 
4 - 8  years 1200 4 - 6 years 700 4 - 8  years 1200 
7 - 10 years 1200 
Children (girls) 1 - 3 years 1000 Children (girls) 1 - 3 years 500 Children (girls) 1 - 3 years 1000 
4 - 8  years 1200 4 - 6 years 700 4 - 8  years 1200 
7 - 10 years 1200 
Adolescent (boys) 9  - 13 years 1500 Adolescent (boys) 11 - 14 years 1600 Adolescent (boys) 9  - 13 years 1500 
14 - 18  years 1500 15 - 18  years 1600 14 - 18  years 1500 
Adolescent (girls) 9  - 13 years 1500 Adolescent (girls) 11 - 14 years 1600 Adolescent (girls) 9  - 13 years 1500 
14 - 18  years 1500 15 - 18  years 1600 14 - 18  years 1500 
427 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Sod ium 
Age AI (m g/day) Age R N I (m g/day) 
M alaysia 201 7 
Age AI (m g/day) 
SACN  2003 IO M  2006 
M en 19  - 29  years 1500 M en 19  - 50  years 1600 M en 19  - 29  years 1500 
30 - 50 years 1500 > 50 years 1600 30 - 50 years 1500 
51 - 59  years 1500 51 - 59  years 1500 
60 - 69  years 1500 60 - 69  years 1500 
> 70 years 1200 > 70 years 1200 
W om en 19  - 29  years 1500 W om en 19  - 50 years 1600 W om en 19  - 29  years 1500 
30 - 50 years 1500 >50 years 1600 30 - 50 years 1500 
51 - 59  years 1500 51 - 59  years 1500 
60 - 69  years 1500 60 - 69  years 1500 
> 70 years 1200 > 70 years 1200 
Pregnancy 14 - 18  years 1500 Pregnancy 14 - 18  years 1500 
19  - 30 years 1500 19  - 30 years 1500 
31 - 50 years 1500 31 - 50 years 1500 
Lactation 14 - 18  years 1500 Lactation 14 - 18  years 1500 
19  - 30 years 1500 19  - 30 years 1500 
31 - 50 years 1500 31 - 50 years 1500 
428 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
24 • Potassium 
24.1 Introduction 
Potassium is a chemical element with symbol K (Kalium) and atomic number of 19. The 
nam e is derived from the collection of wood ash in metal pots when the beneficial fertilizer 
properties of this material were first recognized. Potassium is a soft, silvery-white metal and a 
mem ber of the alkali group of the periodic chart. Potassium oxidizes rapidly in air and is 
generally stored under oil or grease. High solubility of potassium in water mak es it applicable 
in industry goods, such as fertilizers, liquid soaps and detergents. Potassium in the form of 
potassium chloride is used in pharmaceuticals, medical drips and saline injections. The huma n 
body contains about 3.5-5 mmol potassium. Only 2% of potassium  is in the extracellular fluid 
and the rest is held in the cells by complex mechanisms (Ringer & Bartlett, 2007). 
24.2 Functions 
Potassium is classified as a macro-mineral and is the major intracellular cation required 
for normal cellular functions in the body. The ratio of intracellular to extracellular potassium  is 
the m ajor determinant of mu scular and neuronal excitability. Relatively small changes in the 
concentration of extracellular potassium can greatly affect the extracellular to intracellular 
potassium ratio. This will affect neural transmission, muscle contraction and vascular tone. 
Potassium helps muscles contract, regulates fluids and acid base balance in the blood and 
tissues along with sodium. In the nerve cells, the sodium-potassium  flux generates the electrical 
potential that aids the conduct of nerve impulses (Institute of Medicine, IOM, 2006). 
Potassium changes the membrane potential and allows the nerve impulse to progress. 
This electrical potential gradient created by the Na +/K +-ATP ase pump helps to generate muscle 
contractions and regulates the heartbeat. The high intracellular concentration of potassium is 
maintained via the activity of the Na +/K +-ATP ase pum p. Ap proximately 77 to 90% of dietary 
potassium is excreted in urine, wh ile the remainder is excreted ma inly in faeces, with much 
smaller amounts being lost in sweat. There is no effective method for potassium conservation, 
unlike sodium. The kidneys continue to excrete potassium even when a shortage occurs. It is 
essential to maintain potassium  balance in the body for regular heart contractions and healthy 
nervous system (Palmer & Clegg, 2016). 
Increased potassium intake is known to reduce blood pressure, decrease risk of 
cardiovascular diseases and lessen the negative impacts of high sodium intake. This is due to 
the function of potassium being tightly bound to sodium. Excess of sodium intake will deplete 
potassium, thus, the balance of potassium and sodium is imp ortant (Aburto et al., 2013; 
Ober leithner et al., 2009). The ratio of sodium and potassium is reported as an important factor 
in cardiovascular disease and mortality and is a better predictor of cardiovascular outcome  than 
either potassium or sodium individually (Cook et al., 2009; Yang et al., 2011). Recent meta- 
analysis demonstrated that sodium-to-potassium ratio is mor e strongly associated to blood 
pressure outcomes than either individual nutrients (Perez & Chang, 2014).  
429 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Potassium 
24.3 M etabolism 
In healthy persons, approximately 85% of dietary potassium is absorbed. There is 50 
m Eq/kg of potassium in the body which mean total body potassium in a 70 kg person is 3,500 
m Eq. Potassium is found mainly within cells (98% ) and the rest of the potassium is in the 
extracellular fluid. The norm al concentration of potassium in the extracellular fluid is around 3.5- 
5.3 mEq/l. About 90% of the daily potassium intake is excreted in the urine, whereas a smaller 
percentage (10%) is excreted through the gastrointestinal tract. The colon contains about 30 
mm ol/L of potassium but it is reabsorbed in the final part of the bow el. Thus, the faeces contain 
a small amount  of potassium. Excretion in faeces and swe at is usually negligible. Potassium is 
also cofactor for m any enzym es and it is also required for creatine phosphorylation, 
carbohydrate metabolism and protein synthesis (Perez & Chang, 2014).  
Potassium in urine results ma inly from secretion of potassium into the cortical collecting 
duct. This secretion is regulated by a number of factors, including the horm one aldosterone. The 
latter is released by adrenal cortex when it is stimulated due to elevated plasma  concentration 
of potassium. Insulin, catecholamine, and aldosterone are critical factors responsible for 
m aintaining the normal internal distribution of potassium. The kidney is the major organ 
responsible for buffering the movement  of potassium  into or out of skeletal muscle cells. 
Internal potassium balance is a term used to refer to the regulation of potassium between the 
intracellular and extracellular space. The kidney facilitates potassium homeos tasis by adjusting 
renal potassium excretion over several hours in response to a potassium load. Initial changes 
in extracellular potassium concentration are buffered by moveme nt of potassium into or out of 
skeletal muscle cells (Palmer & Clegg, 2016). 
A lmost all cells possess the Na +-K +-ATPase, which pump s sodium out of the cell and 
potassium into the cell that leads to a potassium gradient across the cell membr ane that is 
partially responsible for maintaining the potential difference across the memb rane. This potential 
difference is critical to the function of cells, particularly in excitable tissues, such as nerve and 
m uscle. The body has developed num erous mech anism s for defense of serum potassium. 
These mechanisms  serve to maintain a proper distribution of potassium  within the body as 
w ell as regulate the total body potassium content (Palmer & Clegg, 2016). 
24.4 Sources 
Potassium norm ally can be obtained from one’s diet and thus, the body usually does 
not need to draw from intracellular potassium (Ringer & Bartlett, 2007). It is important to note 
that the beneficial effects of potassium in some studies appear to be mainly in the forms of 
potassium that are associated with bicarbonate precursor; the forms found naturally in foods 
such as fruits and vegetables. Eating diets high in potassium has been linked to reducing blood 
pressure, decreasing the risk of stroke, imp roving bone health, and reducing the risk of 
nephrolithiasis more than taking potassium su pplements. This suggests that not only is 
potassium critical, but also consumption of the foods enriched in potassium provides benefits. 
Several food groups have been recommended as excellent food sources of potassium (Table 
24.1).  
430 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Potassium 
Table 24.1: Potassium co ntent of foods. 
Legumes & legume products 
Soya bean 397 
Chick pea 345 
Kidney bean 315 
Tem peh 178 
Ferm ented soya bean paste 233 
Fish 
Tuna 344 
N uts 
Cashew nut 410 
D ried walnut 260 
Vegetables 
Spinach 385 
Cabbage 103 
Carrot 136 
Potato 203 
Sweet potato 210 
O nion (small) 279 
Pumpkin 113 
Tom ato 129 
Cucumber 76 
M ilk product 
Yoghurt 153 
Fruits and fruits products 
Exotica papaya 137 
Banana 379 
D ates 62 
Papaya 39 
Tom ato juice 84 
Food Sources mg/100g 
Sources: USDA , 2010; WHO, 2012; Tee et al. 1997. 
431 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Potassium 
24.5 D eficiency 
Severe potassium deficiency is characterized by hypokalemia, a situation when serum 
potassium concentration is less than 3.5 mmol /L. It can be induced by diuretics, chloride- 
depletion associated forms of metabolic alkalosis and increased aldosterone production 
(Kjelden, 2010). Hypokalem ia can affect the functions of pancreas through reduction of the 
insulin secretions that causes reversible glucose intolerance. 
A  low  potassium diet, as low as 0.58 g (15 mmol/day) can cause a decrease in plasma 
insulin concentration and caused a resistance to insulin action. This can be reversed when 
dietary potassium is supplemented at 4.8 g (64 mmo l/day). The adverse consequences of 
hypokalem ia include cardiac arrhythm ias, mu scle weakness and glucose intolerance. Moderate 
potassium deficiency is characterized by increased blood pressure, increased salt sensitivity, 
increased risk of kidney stones and increased bone turnover (Ringer & Bartlett, 2007). 
A n inadequate intake of dietary potassium may also increase the risk of cardiovascular 
disease, particularly stroke (D ’Elia et al., 2011). The adverse effects of inadequate potassium 
intake can result from  a deficiency of potassium. It is a deficiency of its conjugate anion, or 
both. Potassium deficiency due to low dietary intake only is very uncommon. This is due to the 
w idespread occurrence of potassium in food. Potassium  deficiency can develop as a 
consequence of increasing losses from the gastrointestinal tract and kidneys, e.g. during 
prolonged diarrhoea or vomiting, and in connection with use of laxatives or diuretics.  
24.6 Factors affecting potassium requirements 
Increased losses of potassium, primarily through heavy sw eating can occur with heat 
exposure and intense activity level. Previous studies showe d there was a decline in sweat loss 
over time which demonstrated that acclimation occurs. This suggests that potassium balance 
m ight be achieved over a period of time. However, non-acclimated individuals engaged in 
intense physical activities especially at high temp eratures for extended periods of time 
experience profuse sweating. Thus, these individuals should have higher potassium intake to 
replace the loss of potassium. 
A nother factor will be diuretics which is one of the most frequently prescribed drugs for 
hypertension and congestive heart failure. This kind of drugs increases urinary excretion of 
potassium. Diuretic-induced hypokalemia may need potassium suppleme nt to offset the adverse 
effects related to hypokalemia. The interaction of potassium and sodium is also important. The 
requirement for potassium depends on the level of dietary sodium, and the deleterious effects 
of sodium are attenuated by higher intakes of potassium IOM (2006). 
24.7 Setting requirements and recommended intake 
D ata generated from  the NHANE S study conducted in 2007-2008 estimated that both 
m en and women in the USA were obtaining substantially lower levels of potassium from their 
diet than recom mended; the mean intake for wom en and men were estimated to be 2290 
m g/day, and 3026 mg/day respectively (USDA , 2007). In fact, the most recent Dietary Guidelines 
432 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Potassium 
for Am ericans and the Food and Dru g Administration have now designated potassium as a 
nutrient of public health concern since people are not meeting their estimated recommended 
dietary intake (DeSalvo et al. 2016). 
European Food Sa fety Au thority (EFS A, 2013) did not have any recomme ndation for 
potassium. World Health Or ganization (WHO, 2012) recom men ds an increase in potassium 
intake from food to reduce blood pressure and risk of cardiovascular disease, stroke and 
coronary heart disease in adults. Hence, WHO suggested that potassium intake should be at 
least 90 mmol/day (3510 mg/day) for adults and this intake should be adjusted downw ard for 
children, based on the energy requirements of children relative to those of adults. Malaysian 
Health and Adolescents Longitudinal Research Team Study reported that the potassium intakes 
among  the ma le and female adolescents (aged 13 years) were 1096 .6 mg/day and 998 . 
1 mg/day, respectively (Abdul Majid et al. 2015). The latter’s potassium intake was considered 
low when  compar ed to a recent study in USA  (Buendia et al., 2015) that classified low  potassium 
intake among female adolescents to be less than 1800 mg potassium. 
IOM  (2006) has reviewed the amou nt of dietary potassium required for norm al 
hom eostasis. An adequate intake levels for dietary potassium was established at 4.7 g (120 
mmol) /day for all adults when based on available data (IOM , 2006). This level is based on an 
intake of naturally occurring potassium from dietary sources, primarily fruits and vegetables. 
Available evidence indicates that this level of potassium intake should lower blood pressure, 
blunt the adverse effects of sodium chloride on blood pressure, reduce the risk of kidney stones, 
and possibly reduce bone loss. Thus, the Technical Sub-Commi ttee (TS C) on M inerals and 
Trace Elements suggest to adapt the recommendations from IOM  (2006) for the RNI values for 
potassium since it has proposed a set of dietary reference intake values for different age groups 
as well as pregnant and lactating women. Comp arison of recommended intakes for potassium 
from  RNI Malaysia (2017), AI of IOM (2006) and RNI of WHO (2012) are as show n in Appendix 
24.1. 
Infant 
The recomm ended intakes of infants are based on the average amount of potassium in 
human milk that is consumed. For infants from 0 - 6 months, the intake is estimated based on 
the average volume of milk intake (0.78 L/day) and an average concentration of potassium in 
human  milk (0.5 g/L) during the first 6 months of lactation. For the older infant, it can be 
determined by estimating the intake from  human milk (0.3 g/day) and compleme ntary food 
(0.44 g /day). Thus, the total potassium intake is estimated to 0.74 g and rounded to 0.7 g. The 
TSC recom mendations are as follows: 
RN I for infants 
0-6 m onths 0.4 g (10 mmol ) 
7-12 m onths 0.7g (18 mmol) 
433 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Potassium 
Children and adolescent 
RN I for children and adolescents ages 1 to 18 years was derived by extrapolating from 
the adults RNI on the basis of the average of median energy intake levels. This is due to the 
concern that adjustment based on weight might lead to relatively low and potentially inadequate 
intake of potassium. Given the high energy intake of children relative to their weight and the 
potential for a high sodium intake as results of their high energy intake, a greater intake of 
dietary potassium  would be appropriate as a means to reduce the adverse effects of sodium. 
The TSC recommendations are as follows: 
R N I for children and adolescents 
1 - 3 years 3.0 g (77 mmol) 
4 - 8 years 3.8 g (97 mmol) 
9 - 13 years (Girls/boys) 4.5 g (115 mmol ) 
14 - 18 y ears (Girls/boys) 4.7 g (120 mmol ) 
Adults 
A s for adults from age 19 to 50 years, the available data are nonetheless insufficient for 
setting an EAR which requires data at m ultiple intake levels. Present available data are also 
insufficient to set gender specific requirements. Thus, the RNI was set at 4.7 g that could give 
beneficial effects such as decreasing the risk of kidney stones, lowering the blood pressure and 
decreasing bone loss as findings from epidemiological studies. The TS C recomm endations are 
as follows: 
R N I for adults 
M en 
19 - 30 years 4.7 g (120 mmol ) 
31 - 50 years 4.7 g (120 mmol ) 
Wom en 
19 - 30 years 4.7 g (120 mmol ) 
31 - 50 years 4.7 g (120 mmol ) 
434 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Potassium 
O lder adults 
As for adults from age 50 years and above, they consume less energy than younger 
adults. How ever, due to increased risk of elevated blood pressure with aging, the potassium 
needs to be greater and not adjusted down for older adults. There is a lack of evidence to 
suggest that the requirement for potassium differs in normal healthy older adults and elderly 
comp ared with younger individuals, the RNI is set at the sam e level of intake as for young 
adults. However, this RNI does not apply to individuals with medical conditions or taking drugs 
that impair the potassium excretion. The TSC recommendations are as follows: 
RN I for older adults 
Men 
51 - 6 0 years 4.7 g (120 mm ol) 
> 60 years 4.7 g (120 mm ol) 
Women 
51 - 6 0 years 4.7 g (120 mm ol) 
> 60 years 4.7 g (120 mm ol) 
Pregnancy 
Potassium accretion during pregnancy is very small and there is an absence of data to 
suggest that the requireme nt for potassium is different during pregnancy. Thus, it is set at 
4.7 g, the same as non-pregnant women. The TSC recommendations are as follows: 
RN I for pregnancy 
14 -  1 8 years 4.7 g (120 mm ol) 
19 - 30 years 4.7 g (120 mm ol) 
31 - 50 years 4.7 g (120 mm ol) 
Lactation 
The potassium content of human milk averages around 0.5 g/L (13 mmol/L) during the 
first 6 months of lactation. Average milk production during the first 6 months of lactation is 
about 7.8L/d. Thus approximately, 0.4 g (10 mmol)/ day of potassium is needed for lactation 
during this period (0.5 g/L X 0.78 L/day = 0.4 g/day). Due to the lack of informa tion, it is 
assumed that the efficiency of conversion dietary potassium to milk produced is almost 100%. 
The TSC recom mendations are as follows: 
435 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Potassium 
R N I for lactation 
14 - 18 y ears 5.1 g (130 mmol ) 
19 - 30 years 5.1 g (130 mmol ) 
31 - 50 years 5.1 g (130 mmol ) 
24.8 Tolerable upper intake level 
In a generally healthy population with normal kidney function, a potassium intake from 
foods above the RNI poses no potential for increased risk because excess potassium is readily 
excreted in the urine. Therefore, a Tolerable Uppe r Intake Level (UL) was not set.  However, in 
individuals in whom u rinary excretion of potassium  is impaired, a potassium  intake below 
4.7 g (120 mmol )/day is appropriate because of adverse cardiac effects (arrhythmias) from the 
resulting hyperkalemia (a markedly elevated serum potassium concentration). Such individuals 
are typically under medical supervision. However, potassium  supplement should be avoided 
as it can cause acute toxicity. As for infants, potassium intake should be only from formula and 
com plementary foods as their renal secreting ability is not fully developed. 
24.9 R esearch recommendations 
In recent years, potassium has received substantial attention due to its ability to attenuate 
deleterious effects of sodium. Future research should work to determine the optimal ratio of 
sodium to potassium intake. Local based studies should be encourage to determine the 
recomm ended levels for Malaysians as well as safe dosage of potassium in order to ensure 
optimum physiological functioning without adverse effects. 
436 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Potassium 
24.10 References 
Abur to NJ, Hanson S, Guttierez H, Elliot P & Cappucio FP (2013). Effect of increased potassium 
intake on cardiovascular risk factors and disease: System atic review  and meta-analyses, 
British Medical Journal 346:f1378: 1-19. 
Abdul Majid H, Ramli L, Ying SP , Tin TS, Jalaludin MY & Al-Sada t A bdul Mohsein N (2015). 
Dietary Intake among Adolescents in a Middle-Income Country: An Outcome from the 
Malay sian Health and Adolescents Longitudinal Research Team S tudy (the MyHeARTs 
Study). PloS One . 11:1-14. 
Buendia JR, Loring Bradlee M, Dani els SR, Singer MR & Moore LL (2015) Longitudinal Effects 
of Dietary Sodium and Potassium on Blood Pressure in Adolescent Gi rls, JAMA Ped iatr. 
2015;169(6):560-568 
Cook N R, Obar zanek E, Cutler JA, Buring JE, Rexrode KM, Kumanyika SK, Appel LJ & Whelton 
PK (2009). Joint effects of sodium and potassium intake on subsequent cardiovascular 
disease: the Trials of Hypertension Prevention follow-up study. A rch Intern M ed 
169(1):32-40. 
D ’Elia L, Barba G, Cappuccio F & S trazzullo P (2011). Potassium  intake, stroke, and 
cardiovascular disease: a me ta-analysis of prospective studies. J Am C oll Cardiol 57: 
1210-9. 
De Salvo KB, Olson R & Casavale KO (2016). Dietary Guidelines for Ame ricans. JAMA 315: 457- 
458. 
Eu ropean Food Safety Authority (2013). Scientific Opinion on D ietary Reference Values for 
manganese. EFSA Journal 11 (11): 3419. 
Institute of Medicine (IOM) (2006). Dietary Reference Intakes: The Ess ential Guide to Nutrient 
Requireme nts. J. J. Otten, J. P . Hellwig and L. D. M eyers. Washin gton, D.C, National 
Acade my of Sciences 
Kjeldsen K (2010). Hypokalemia and sudden cardiac death. Exp Clin Cardiol ;15(4):e96-e99. 
O berleithner H, Callies C, Kusche-Vihrog K, et al. (2009). Potassium  softens vascular 
endothelium and increases nitric oxide release. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 106(8):2829- 
2834. 
Palmer BF & Clegg DJ. (2016). Physiology and pathophysiology of potassium homeo stasis. 
Ad vances in Physiology Education, 40(4):480-490. 
Perez V & Chang ET (2014).Sodium-to-potassium ratio and blood pressure, hypertension, and 
related factors. Advances in Nutrition: An  International Review Journal, 5(6), 712-741. 
Ringer J & Bartlett Y (2007). The significance of potassium. The Pharmaceutical Journal. 278: 
497-500. 
437 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Potassium 
Tee ES, Ismail MN, Mohd Nasir A & Khatijah I (199 7). Nu trient Co mp osition of Malaysian Foods. 
Ma laysian Food Composition Da tabase Programme (4th ed.). Kuala Lumpur : Institute 
for Medical Research. 
U .S. D epartment of Agriculture and U .S. Depar tment of Health and Human Services. (2010). 
D ietary G uidelines for Americans (7th Ed ition). Washi ngton, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office. 
U SD A/Agricultural Research Service. Nutrient intakes from food. Me an amounts consumed per 
individual, by gender and age. Wh at we eat in Ameri ca, NHANES 2 007/2008 . 
w ww .ars.usda.gov/ba/bhnrc/fsrg. 
W HO (2012). Guideline: Potassium intake for adults and children. Gen eva: Wo rld Health 
O rganization (WHO). 
Yang Q, Liu T, Kuklina EV, Flanders WD, Hong Y, Gillespie C, Chang MH, Gw inn M, Dowling N, 
Khoury MJ  &  Hu FB (2011). Sodium and potassium intake and mor tality among US 
adults: prospective data from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. 
A rch Intern Med, 171(13):1183- 1191. 
438 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Potassium 
Age R N I (g/day) Age AI (g/day) 
M alaysia (201 7) 
Age R N I (g/day) 
IO M  (2006 ) W H O  (201 2) 
Appendix 24 .1 . Com parison of recom m ended intakes for Potassium : R N I of M alaysia (201 7), AI of IO M  (2006 ) and R N I of W H O  (201 2) 
Infants Infants Infants 
0 - 6 m onths               0.4 0 - 6 m onths              0.4 0 - 6 m onths              -
7 - 12 m onths              0.7 7 - 12 m onths            0.7 7 - 11 m onths              -
Children Children Children 
1 - 3 years                  3.0 1 - 3 years 3.0 1 - 3 years                 -
4 - 8  years                 3.8 4 - 8  years                 3.8 4 - 6 years -
7 - 10 years -
Boys Boys Boys 
9  - 13 years                  4.5 9  - 13 years 4.5 11-14 years               -
14 - 18  years               4.7 14 - 18  years 4.7 15 -17 years             -
G irls G irls G irls 
9  - 13 years                  4.5 9 -13 years                 4.5 11-14 years               -
14 - 18  years               4.7 14 -18  years             4.7 15 -17 years              -
M en M en M en 
>19  years                   4.7 >19  years                  4.7 ≥18  years                  3.5 
W om en W om en W om en 
>19  years                   4.7 >19  years                 4.7 ≥18  years                  3.5 
439 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Potassium 
Age R N I (g/day) Age AI (g/day) 
M alaysia (201 7) 
Age R N I (g/day) 
IO M  (2006 ) W H O  (201 2) 
Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy -
< 18  years old            4.7 < 18  years old           4.7 
>19  years old             4.7 >19  years old            4.7 
Lactation Lactation Lactation -
< 18  years old            5.1 < 18  years old           5.1 
>19  years old            5.1 >19  years old            5.1 
440 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
25 • Magnesium 
25.1 Introduction 
Magnesi um is the eleventh most abundant element in the human body. An adult body 
contains approximately 25 g magnesium, with 50% to 60% present in the bones and most of 
the rest in soft tissues (Volpe, 2012). Less than 1% of total magne sium is in blood serum, and 
this level is kept under tight control. Normal serum ma gnesium concentrations ranges between 
0.75 and 0.95 mmo l/L. App roximately 0.3 % of body magnesium is in the serum, as free cations 
(about 54 %), which is the bioactive form, as a protein-bound form (about 33%) mainly to 
albumin (75 %) and as anion comp lexes (about 13 %), Elin (2010). Magnesium concentrations 
in blood cells are higher than in the serum: eight times in reticulocytes, three times in red blood 
cells. 
25.2 Functions 
Magne sium is a cofactor of more than 300 enzym atic reactions, acting either on the 
substrates (especially for reactions involving adenosine triphosphate (A TP) by facilitating the 
transfer of phosphate) or on the enzyme itself as a structural or catalytic component. As ATP 
utilization is involved in many metabolic pathways, magnesium is essential in the intermediary 
metabolism for the synthesis of carbohydrates, lipids, nucleic acids and proteins, as we ll as for 
specific actions in various organs such as the neuromuscular or cardiovascular system. 
Magne sium can interfere with calcium at the m em brane level or bind to mem brane 
phospholipids, thus m odulating membrane permeability and electrical characteristics. 
Magnesium has an impact on bone health through its role in the structure of hydroxyapatite 
crystals in bone. 
25.3 Metabolism 
Ma gnesium absorption takes place in the distal intestine, ma inly as the ionized form . 
Percentage absorption are generally considered to be between 40% to 50 %. The majority of 
the body magnesium content is stored in bone (about 60 %) and muscle (about 25 %). A small 
amount is present in the serum, mainly as the free cation. Most cells are able to actively and 
rapidly buffer magnesium loss or accumulation through the involveme nt of specific magnesium 
transporters. 
The kidney plays a major role in m agnesium homeostasis and maintenance of serum 
concentration. Urinary magnesium excretion is increased by high natriuresis, osmotic load and 
m etabolic acidosis, and reduced by me tabolic alkalosis, parathyroid hormone and, possibly, 
calcitonin. A large proportion of the magn esium content of faeces stems  from unabsorbed 
magnesium. Endogenous magnesium is lost through bile, pancreatic and intestinal juices, and 
intestinal cells, and part of this can be re-absorbed. Magnesium losses through sweat are 
modest and very variable, depending on the techniques used for swe at collection, and losses 
through menstruation are negligible. 
441 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Ma gnesium 
25.4 Sources 
The magnesium content in Malaysian foods is not available in local food composition 
table and data on dietary intakes are scarce.  
M agnesium is widely distributed in plant and animal foods and in beverages. Green leafy 
vegetables, such as spinach, legumes, nuts, seeds, and wh ole grains, are good sources. In 
general, foods containing dietary fibre provide magnesium. Magnesium is also added to some 
breakfast cereals and other fortified foods. Som e types of food processing, such as refining 
grains in w ays that rem ove the nutrient-rich germ and bran, lower magnesium content substantially. 
Tap, m ineral, and bottled waters can also be sources of magnesium, but the amount of 
m agnesium in water varies by source and brand (Azouly, 2001). Azrina et al. (2012) reported 
that the magnesium content in Malaysian drinking water ranges from  0.07 mg/L to 4.11 mg/L). 
Food sources and magnesium content (mg/100g) is shown in Table 25.1. 
Table 25.1. Magnesium content of foods 
Cereals & grains 
W heat bran 156 
Bran flakes cereal 109 
W hole wheat bread 100 
Brown rice 37 
M ilk & products 
Low fat milk 14 
N uts, legumes & lentils 
Cashew nuts 292 
D ry roasted almonds 225 
Peanut butter 153 
Cooked lentils 32 
Fruits & vegetables 
Spinach 79 
Baked potato with skin 42 
Banana 27 
G reen beans 25 
Broccoli 21 
Fish & shellfish 
Fish (mackerel, cod, halibut) 76 
Tuna fish 40 
Food m g/ 100g 
Sources: USDA  National Nutrient Database (2012) 
25.5 Deficiencies 
Asses sing magnesium status is difficult because most m agnesium is inside cells or in 
bone. The most commonl y used and readily available method for assessing ma gnesium status 
is measureme nt of serum m agnesium concentration, even though serum  levels have little 
correlation with total body magnesium levels or concentrations in specific tissues (Gibso n, 
2005). Other m ethods for assessing magnesium  status include m easuring m agnesium 
concentrations in erythrocytes, saliva, and urine; measuring ionized magnesium  concentrations 
in blood, plasma, or serum;  and conducting a magnesium-loading (or “tolerance”) test (in w hich 
urinary magnesium  is measured after parenteral infusion of a dose of magnesium). No single 
me thod is considered satisfactory (W itkowski, Hubert & Mansu, 2011) and both laboratory 
tests and a clinical assessment might be required to comp rehensively evaluate magnesium 
status. 
Sym ptom atic magn esium deficiency due to low dietary intake in otherwise-healthy 
people is uncom mon because the kidneys limit urinary excretion of this mineral (Rude, 2012). 
Howev er, habitually low intakes or excessive losses of m agnesium due to certain health 
conditions, chronic alcoholism, and/or the use of certain medications can lead to magnesium 
deficiency. 
Ear ly signs of magnesium deficiency include loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, 
and weakness. As magnesium deficiency worsens, numbness, tingling, mu scle contractions 
and cramps, seizures, personality changes, abnormal heart rhythms, and coronary spasms can 
occur (IO M, 1997; Rude, 2010). Severe magnesium deficiency can result in hypocalcemia or 
hypokalemia (low serum calcium or potassium levels, respectively) because m ineral 
homeostasis is disrupted (Rude, 2010). 
Habitually low intakes of magnesium induce changes in biochemical pathways that can 
increase the risk of illness over time. 
A diet containing more magnesium because of added fruits and vegetables, more low- 
fat or non-fat dairy products, and less fat overall was shown to lower systolic and diastolic 
blood pressure by an average of 5.5 and 3.0 mmHg, respectively (Champa gne, 2006). However, 
this D ietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet al.so increases intakes of other 
nutrients, such as potassium and calcium that are associated with reductions in blood pressure, 
so any independent contribution of magnesium cannot be determined. A system atic review  and 
meta-analysis of prospective studies found that higher serum levels of mag nesium we re 
significantly associated with a lower risk of cardiovascular disease, and higher dietary 
mag nesium intakes (up to approximately 250 mg/day) were associated with a significantly low er 
risk of ischemic heart disease caused by a reduced blood supply to the heart mu scle. 
N evertheless, large, well-designed clinical trials are needed to better understand the 
contributions of magnesium from food and dietary supplements to heart health and the primary 
prevention of cardiovascular disease. 
Diets with higher amounts of magnesium are associated with a significantly lower risk 
of diabetes, possibly because of the important role of magn esium in glucose metabolism 
(Larsson & W olke 2007; Rodriguez-Moran et al. 2011). Most investigations of magnesium 
intake and risk of type 2 diabetes have been prospective cohort studies. A 2011 meta-analysis 
442 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
M ag nesium 
443 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Ma gnesium 
of prospective cohort studies on the association between magne sium intake and risk of type 2 
diabetes included 13 studies with a total of 536,318 participants and 24,516 cases of diabetes 
(Evert et al., 2013). Only a few sm all, short-term clinical trials have examined the potential 
effects of supplem ental magnesium on control of type 2 diabetes and the results are conflicting. 
The Ameri can D iabetes Association states that there is insufficient evidence to support the 
routine use of magnesium to improve glycemic control in people with diabetes (Evert et al., 
2013). It further notes that there is no clear scientific evidence that vitamin and mineral 
supplementation benefits people with diabetes wh o do not have underlying nutritional 
deficiencies. 
Ma gnesium  is involved in bone form ation and influences the activities of osteoblasts 
and osteoclasts (Rude, Singer & Gruber 2009). Magnesium also affects the concentrations of 
both parathyroid hormo ne and the active form of vitamin D, which are major regulators of bone 
hom eostasis. Several population-based studies have found positive associations between 
ma gnesium intake and bone mineral density in both men and women  (Tucker, 2009). O ther 
research has found that women with osteoporosis have lower serum ma gnesium levels than 
w omen w ith osteopenia and those who do not have osteoporosis or osteopenia (Mutlu et al., 
2007). These and other findings indicate that magnesium deficiency might be a risk factor for 
osteoporosis (Rude et al., 2009). Diets that provide recomme nded levels of magnesium enhance 
bone health, but further research is needed to elucidate the role of magnesium in the prevention 
and management of osteoporosis. 
M agnesium def iciency is related to factors that prom ote headaches, including 
neurotransm itter release and vasoconstriction (Sun-edelstein & Mauskop 2009). People who 
experience migraine headaches have lower levels of serum and tissue magnesium than those 
w ho do not. In their evidence-based guideline update, the American Academy  of Neurology and 
the Am erican Headache Society concluded that magne sium therapy is “probably effective” for 
m igraine prevention (Holland et al., 2012). Because the typical dose of magnesium used for 
migraine prevention exceeds the UL, this treatment should only be used under the direction 
and supervision of a healthcare provider. 
25.6 Factors affecting magnesium requirement 
A pproximately 30% to 40% of the dietary magnesium consumed are typically absorbed 
by the body. High levels of dietary fibre from fruits, vegetables, and grains decrease magnesium 
absorption and/or retention (Wisker et al., 1991) 
Balance studies performed either in children or in adults did not detect an interaction 
between magnesium and calcium balances (Spencer et al. 1994; Andon et al. 1996; Abr ams  
et al. 1997 ; Nielsen & Milne 2000; Klevay & Milne 2002). Howeve r, in two studies, calcium 
balance was significantly higher under conditions of negative mag nesium  balance (at 
m agnesium intakes of 107 and 118 mg/day) than with a positive magnesium balance (at 
m agnesium intakes of 318 and 327 mg/day) (Nielsen 2004; Nielsen et al. 2007). 
444 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
M ag nesium 
Mangane se shares physical properties with mag nesium that enable it to be 
interchangeable with ma gnesium in enzymatic phosphate transfer reactions and it has been 
used as a probe to study the role of magnesium in these processes, particularly in energy 
metabolism. However, the relevance of this interrelationship to huma n dietary requirements is 
uncertain. 
There are some studies indicating a relationship with protein intake, possibly through 
increased apparent magnesium absorption. Wisker et al. (1991 ) showed that percentage faecal 
mag nesium excretion and balances differed significantly between low-fibre and high-fibre diets 
containing adequate amounts of protein; however, Kelsay & Prather (1983) showe d there was 
no clear effect of diets low and high in fibre and oxalic acid on magnesium balances. Overall, 
data on interactions between magnesium and other minerals, protein or fibre are limited. 
Gast rointestinal diseases such as chronic diarrhea and fat malabsorption resulting from 
Crohn’s disease, gluten-sensitive enteropathy (celiac disease), and regional enteritis can lead 
to magnesium depletion over time (Rude, 2010). Resection or bypass of the small intestine, 
especially the ileum, typically leads to malabsorption and magnesium loss. 
Magne sium deficits and increased urinary magnesium excretion can occur in people 
with insulin resistance and/or type 2 diabetes (Chaudrey et al., 2010; Tosiello 19 9 6.). The 
magne sium loss appears to be secondary to higher concentrations of glucose in the kidney 
that increase urine output. 
People with chronic alcoholism often have poor dietary intake and nutritional status; 
gastrointestinal problems, including vomiting, diarrhea, and steatorrhea (fatty stools) resulting 
from  pancreatitis; renal dysfunction with excess excretion of m agnesium into the urine; 
phosphate depletion; vitamin D deficiency; acute alcoholic ketoacidosis; and hyperaldosteronism 
secondary to liver disease which can all contribute to decreased magnesium  status (Chaudhary 
et al., 2010). 
Older adults have lowe r dietary intakes of magnesium than younger adults (Tosiello, 
1996). In addition, magnesium absorption from the gut decreases and renal m agnesium 
excretion increases with age (Musso, 2009). Older adults are also more likely to have chronic 
diseases or take medications that alter magnesium status, which can increase their risk of 
magnesium depletion (Barbagallo, 2009). 
25.7 Setting requirements and recommended intakes of magnesium 
The requirements for magnesium set by IOM  in 1997  were retained in IOM  (2006), while 
EFSA has published values for 2015 based on data from  European countries. 
The IOM  (1997), WHO /FAO (2004), and EFSA (2015) committees have acknowledged 
that results of balance studies are difficult to interpret owing to methodological limitations in 
some studies, takes a long time to achieve equilibrium and the potential for physiological 
adaptations to low magnesium intakes. Nevertheless, most countries set their recommendations 
for magnesium based on balance studies and urinary magnesium excretion before and after 
magnesium loading for adults.  
445 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Ma gnesium 
Infants 
Several countries have assum ed that ma gnesium retention is about 3 mg/kg body weight 
per day during grow th, which could be achieved from  an intake of 6 mg/kg body weight per day 
(IOM , 1997). Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) for magne sium wa s derived on the basis of this 
value and taking into account reference body weights of the age groups. Values were set as 
A dequate Intake (AI). 
In breast-fed infants aged 0-6 m onths, magnesium requirement is set based on amount 
in breast milk reported to be between 25-34 mg/L. IOM has set the AI requirem ent as follow s: 
D uring the second 6 months of life, solid foods become  a more important part of the 
infant diet and add a significant but poorly defined amount of magnesium. The requirement for 
infants above the age of 6 months is estimated based on intake from solid foods and breast milk. 
EF SA  recommen ds an intake of 80 mg/day based on the mean observed intakes in four EU 
countries where available data showed a range 72-120 mg/day.  
The TSC  on M inerals recommended that the Malaysian RNI of magnesium be based on 
the AI and RDA recomm endations of IOM (1997, 2006). 
AI for infants 
0 - 6 m onths 30 mg/day 
AI for infants 
7 - 12 months 75 mg/day 
Children and adolescents 
U nlike calcium, for which max imal retention can be associated with benefit to bone mass 
accretion, and in the absence of adequate balance or usual accretion data in children aged 1 
through 8 years, m ost countries including IOM extrapolated ma gnesium EA R for children in 
various age groups based on changes in body weight and linear growth. Then a CV of 
approximately 10 percent is assumed for each EAR.  
Requirements for boys ages 9 through 13 years appear to be similar with girls  per kg 
per day (Abram s et al. 19 97). Several countries also set the requireme nts for magnesium based 
on dietary intake reported in We stern countries. The values are similar to what IOM ha d set 
based on EAR and included a CV of 10%. 
For girls aged 10 to 18 years, the midpoint of average intakes for non-pregnant girls was 
considered and AI was set at 250 mg/day. However, IOM recommends  EA R values of 340 mg 
for boys and 300 mg for girls aged 14-18 years and added a CV of 10% to obtain the RNI values. 
EF SA  recom m endations set AIs based on observed intakes in EU countries. For boys 
and girls aged 1 to < 3 years, the midpoint of average intakes was considered and AI of 170 
m g/day was recommended for boys and girls. For boys and girls aged 3 to < 10 years, on the 
sam e basis as for children aged 1 to < 3 years, the midpoint of average intakes was used to set 
446 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
M ag nesium 
an AI of 230 mg/day for boys and girls. EFSA approached the recomm endation for older children 
where for boys aged 10 to 18 years, they considered the distribution of the observed average 
intakes among European countries, and selects the midpoint of average intakes and sets an AI 
of 300 mg/day. 
RN I for children and adolescents 
1 - 3 years 80 m g/day 
4 - 8 years 130 m g/day 
9 - 13  years 240 m g/day 
Boys 
14 -  1 8 years 410 m g/day 
Girls 
14 -  1 8 years 360 m g/day 
Adults 
A pooled analysis of well-controlled balance studies in adults suggests that zero 
m agnesium balance may occur at a magnesium intake of 165 mg/day (Hunt & Johnson, 2006). 
According to IOM, available balance data indicate that the EAR for men and women aged over 
51 years is similar and a CV of 10% is assumed to determine the RNI. Dec lining renal function 
with age was also taken into consideration for older adults. 
However, although EFSA considers magnes ium balance studies to be the most suitable 
basis for setting reference values, the overall results of these studies were considered 
inconsistent and requirement by EFSA were based on average intake. Thus, for men, EFSA 
proposed an AI of 350 mg/day and for women , on the same basis, proposed an AI of 300 
mg/day. The Panel considered that these AIs apply to all adults, including older adults. 
RN I for adults 
Men 
19 - 30 years 400 mg/day 
31 - 50 years 420 mg /day 
51 - 70 years 420 mg/day 
>70 years 420 mg/day 
Women 
19 - 30 years 310 mg/day 
31 - 50 years 320 mg/day 
51 - 70 years 420 mg/day 
>70 years 320 mg/day 
447 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Ma gnesium 
Pregnan cy & lactation 
EFS A considered that pregnancy induces only a small increase in m agnesium 
requirement probably covered by adaptive physiological mechanisms and increases in energy 
intake in pregnancy. Hence, the Panel considered that the AI for non-pregnant women also 
applies to pregnant women. 
IO M stated that inconsistent findings on the effect of magnesium supplementation on 
pregnancy outcom e ma ke it difficult to determ ine wh ether ma gnesium  intakes greater than 
those recomme nded for non-pregnant wom en are beneficial. In addition, there are no data 
indicating that magnesium is conserved during pregnancy or intestinal absorption is increased. 
IOM  however assumes that the gain in weight associated with pregnancy alone may result in a 
greater requirem ent for m agnesium. Hence, IO M se ts the E AR with additional 35mg /day for 
pregnancy over the requirements of non-pregnant wom en. The RNI is calculated with a CV of 
10%  over the EAR  as follows: 
Ab out 25 mg/day is secreted with exclusive breastfeeding during the first six months 
after birth. The E FSA  Panel considered the possibility of adaptive processes in magnesium 
m etabolism, at the level of both absorption and elimination and concluded that the AI for non- 
pregnant non-lactating women also applies to lactating wome n. 
IO M also reported that there was no consistent evidence to support an increased 
requirement for dietary magnesium during lactation. Therefore, the EA R and RNI are estimated 
to be the same as that obtained for non-lactating women of similar age and body weight. 
R N I for pregnancy 
14 - 18 y ears 400 m g/day 
19 - 30 years 350 m g/day 
31 - 50 years           360 m g/day 
R N I for lactation 
14 - 18 y ears 360 m g/day 
19 - 30 years 310 m g /day 
31 - 50 years         320 m g/day 
25.8 Tolerable upper intake levels (UL) 
M agnesium, when ingested as a naturally occurring substance in foods, have not been 
show n to exert any adverse effects. However, adverse effects of excess magnesium intake have 
been observed with intakes from non-food sources such as various magnesium salts used for 
pharmac ologic purposes. 
448 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
M ag nesium 
Diarrhoea is the primary manifestation as a result of excessive magnesium intake from 
non-food sources. Individuals with impaired renal function are at greater risk of ma gnesium 
toxicity. Hypermagnesem ia can occur in individuals with impaired renal function and is most 
commonly associated with the combination of impaired renal function and excessive intake of 
non food magnesium such as from antacids. 
The values below show the UL from  magnesium supplements as recom mende d by IO M  (19 97 ): 
Infants 
0 - 12 months Not possible to establish 
Children & adolescents 
1 - 3 years 65 mg/day 
4 - 8 years 110 mg/day 
9 - 13 years 350 mg/day 
14 - 18 years 350 mg/day 
Adults 
M en 350 mg/day 
W omen 350 mg/day 
Pregnancy 350 mg/day 
Lactation 350 mg/day 
25.9 Research recommendat ions 
The following priority areas of research are recommended.: 
• D atabase on magnesium content of local foods and absorption efficacy. 
• Reliable data on population intakes of magnesium are required based on dietary surveys 
that include estimates of intakes from food, water, and supplements in healthy 
• Biomarkers of magnesium status must be investigated in order to assess their ability to 
predict functional outcomes that indicate adequate magnesium status over prolonged 
periods. 
• Studies on the effects of magnesium on health such as the association of low magnesium 
status with carbohydrate and lipid metabolism , and sequelae of the metabolic syndrom e 
including diabetes mellitus. 
• M agnesium  balance studies on various age and ethnic groups to determine optimal 
recommendations of intake. 
449 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Ma gnesium 
25.10 R eferences 
A bram s SA , Grusak MA, Stuff J and O’Brien KO (1997). Calcium and magne sium balance in 9- 
14-yold children. Am J Clin Nutr. 66, 1172-1177. 
A ndon MB, Ilich JZ, Tzagournis MA and Matk ovic V (1996). Magnesium balance in adolescent 
females consuming a low- or high-calcium diet. Am J Clin Nutr. 63, 950- 953. 
A zoulay A, Garzon P , Eisenberg MJ (2001). Comparison of the mineral content of tap water and 
bottled waters. J Gen Intern Med 16:168-75. 
A zrina Az lan, Hock Eng Khoo, Mohd Aizat Idris, Amin Ismail, and Muhammad Rizal Razman 
(2012). Evaluation of M inerals Content of Dr inking Wa ter in Malaysia; The Scientific 
W orld Journal. doi:10.1100/2012/403574. 
Barbagallo M, Belvedere M, Dominguez LJ (2009 ) Magnesium  hom eostasis and aging. Mag nes 
R es 22:235-46. 
Cham pagne CM  (2006). Dietary interventions on blood pressure: the Dietary Approaches to 
Stop Hypertension (DASH ) trials. Nutr Rev 4: S53-56. 
Chaudhary DP , Sharm a R, Bansal DD  (2010). Implications of magnes ium deficiency in type 2 
diabetes: a review. Biol Trace Elem Res 134:119-129. 
Europ ean Food Safety Authority (EFS A) 2015. Panel on D ietetic Products, Nutrition and 
A llergies. Scientific Opinion on D ietary Reference Values for Magnesium. EFSA Journal 
13(7):4186- 4219. 
E lin RJ (2010). Assessment of magnesium status for diagnosis and therapy. Magn es R es. 23:1- 
5. 
Evert AB , Boucher JL, Cypress M , Dunbar SA, Franz M J, M ayer-D avis EJ, Neumiller JJ, 
N w ankw o R, Verdi C L, Urbanski P , Yancy WS Jr (2013). N utrition therapy 
recom mendations for the management of adults with diabetes. Diab Care 36:3821-3842. 
FAO/ WHO (2004). Human Vitamin and Mineral Requirem ents. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO 
Expert Consultation. FAO, Rome; pp 151-171. 
G ibson, RS (2005). Principles of Nutritional Assessm ent, 2nd ed. New York, N Y: Oxford 
U niversity Press. 
G reger JL, Baligar P , Abernathy RP , Bennett OA and Peterson T (1978). Calcium, magnesium, 
phosphorus, copper, and manganese balance in adolescent fema les. Am  J Clin Nu tr. 31, 
117-121. 
Holland S, Silberstein SD , Freitag F, Dodick DW , Argoff C, Ashman E (2012). Evidence-based 
guidelines update. NSAIDs and other complementary treatments for episodic migraine 
prevention in adults. Neurology 78:1346-1353. 
Hunt CD and Johnson LK (2006). Magnesium requirements: new estimations for men and 
wome n by cross-sectional statistical analyses of metabolic m agnesium balance data. 
Am J Clin Nutr 84: 843-852. 
Institute of Medicine (IO M) (2006). Dietary Reference Intakes: The Essential Gu ide to N utrient 
Requiremen ts. O tten, Hellwig Meyers. Washington, D .C, National Ac ademy  of Sciences. 
Institute of M edicine (IOM ) (1997). Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Re ference Intakes: 
Calcium, Phosphorus, Magnesium , Vitamin D and Fluoride. External link disclaimer. 
Washi ngton, DC: National Academ y Press. 
Kelsay JL and Prather ES (1983). Mineral balances of human subjects consuming spinach in a 
low fiber diet and in a diet containing fruits and vegetables. Am J Clin Nutr 38: 12-19. 
Klevay LM and Milne DB (2002). Low dietary magnesium increases supraventricular ectopy. Am 
J Clin Nutr. 75: 550-554 
Larsson SC , Wolk A (2007). Magnesium intake and risk of type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis. J
Intern Med ;262:208-14. 
Mus so CG (2009). Ma gnesium metabolism in health and disease. Int U rol Nephrol 41:357-362. 
Mutlu M, Argun M , Kilic E, Saraymen R, Yazar S (2007). Magnesium, zinc and copper status in 
osteoporotic, osteopenic and normal post-menopausal women. J Int Med R es 35: 692- 
695. 
Nielsen FH and Mi lne DB (2004). A moderately high intake compar ed to a low intake of zinc 
depresses m agnesium balance and alters indices of bone turnover in postmenopausal 
women. Eur J Clin Nutr. 58 (5), 703-710. 
Nielsen FH, Milne DB, Gallagher S, Johnson L and Hoverson B (2007). Moderate magnesium 
deprivation results in calcium retention and altered potassium and phosphorus excretion 
by postmen opausal women. Magnes Res 20 : 19-31. 
Rodriguez-Mor an M, Simental Mendia  LE, Zambrano Galvan G, Gue rrero-Romero  F (2011). 
The role of magnesium in type 2 diabetes: a brief based-clinical review. Ma gnes Res 
;24:156-162. 
Rude RK (2010). Magnesium. In: Coates PM, Betz JM, Blackma n MR, Cragg GM, Levine M, 
Moss J, White JD (eds). Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements. 2nd ed. New York, NY: 
Informa Healthcare :527-537. 
Rude RK (2012).  Magnesi um. In: Ross AC, Caballero B, Cousins RJ, Tucker KL, Ziegler TR 
(eds) Moder n Nutrition in Health and Disease. 11th ed. Baltimore, M ass: Lippincott 
William s & Wilkins :159-175. 
Rude RK, Singer FR, Grub er HE (2009) Skeletal and hormon al effects of magnesium  deficiency. 
J A m Coll Nutr 28:131-141. 
450 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
M ag nesium 
451 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Ma gnesium 
Spencer H, Norris C, Williams D (1994). Inhibitory effects of zinc on ma gnesium balance and 
m agnesium absorption in man. J Am Co ll Nutr 13:479-84. 
Sun-Edelstein C, Mauskop A (2009). Role of magnesium in the pathogenesis and treatment of 
m igraine. Expert Rev Neurother 9:369-379 
Tosiello L (1996). Hypomagn esemia and diabetes mellitus. A review  of clinical implications. 
A rch Intern Med 156:1143-1148. 
Tucker KL (2009). Osteoporosis prevention and nutrition. Cu rr Osteoporos Rep 7:111-117. 
U .S. D epartment of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service (2012). USDA National Nutrient 
Database for Standard Reference, Release 25. Nutrient Data Laboratory Home. 
Volpe SL (2012). Magnesium. In: Erdman JW , M acdonald IA, Zeisel SH (eds) Present 
Knowledge in Nutrition. 10th ed. Ames, Iowa; John Wiley & Sons:  459-474. 
W isker E, Nagel R, Tanudjaja TK and Feldheim W  (1991) . Calcium, magne sium, zinc, and iron 
balances in young women: effects of a low-phytate barley-fiber concentrate. Am J Clin 
N utr 54: 553-559. 
W itkow ski M, Hubert J, Mazur A (2011). Methods of assessmen t of magnesium status in 
hum ans: A systematic review. Magnesium Res 24:163-180. 
452 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
M ag nesium 
M alaysia (201 7) 
Age group R N I (m g/day) 
FAO /W H O  (2002) EFSA (201 5) IO M  (1 997; 2006 ) 
Appendix 25.1  Com parison of recom m ended intake for M agnesium : R N I of M alaysia (201 7), FAO /W H O  (2002), AI of EFSA (201 5), D R I of IO M 
(1 997) and (2006 ) 
Age group R N I (m g/day) Age group AI (m g/day) Age group D R I (m g/day) 
Infants Infants Infants Infants 
0 - 6 m onths 30 0 - 6 m onths 25 0 - 6 m onths 30 
7 - 12 m onths 75 < 1 year 7 - 12 m onths 8 0 7 - 12 m onths 75 
Children Children Children Children 
1 - 3 years 8 0 1 - 3 years 1 - 3 years 170 1 - 3 years 8 0 
4 - 8  years 130 4 - 6 years 3 - 10 years 230 4 - 8  years 130 
7 - 9  years 
Boys Boys Boys Boys 
9  - 13 years 240 10 - 12 years 10 - 18  years 300 9  - 13 years 240 
14 - 18  years 410 13 - 15 years 14-18  years 410 
16 - 19  years 
G irls G irls G irls G irls 
9  - 13 years 240 10 - 12 years 10 - 18  years 250 9  - 13 years 240 
14 - 18  years 360 13 - 15 years 14 - 18  years 360 
16 - 19  years 
453 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Ma gnesium 
M alaysia (201 7) 
Age group R N I (m g/day) 
FAO /W H O  (2002) EFSA (201 5) IO M  (1 997; 2006 ) 
Age group R N I (m g/day) Age group AI (m g/day) Age group D R I (m g/day) 
M en M en M en M en 
19  - 30 years 400 20 - 39  years 19  - 65 years 350 19  - 30 years 400 
31 - 50 years 420 40 - 49  years > 65 years 31 - 50 years 420 
51 - 69  years 420    50 - 59  years                                               >51 years 420 
> 70 years 420 ≥ 60 years 
W om en W om en W om en W om en 
19  - 30 years 310 20 - 39  years 19  - 50 years 19  - 30 years 310 
31 - 50 years 320 40 - 49  years 51 - 65 years 31 - 50 years 320 
51 - 69  years 420 50 - 59  years > 65 years 300 >51 years 320 
>70 years 320 ≥ 60 years 
Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy 
14 - 18 400 1st trim ester 300 14 - 18  years 400 
2nd trim ester 19  - 30 years 350 
19  - 30 350 3rd trim ester 31 - 50 years 360 
31 - 50 360 
Lactation Lactation Lactation Lactation 
14 - 18 360 1st 6 m onths 300 14 - 18  years 360 
19  - 30 310 2nd 6 m onths 19  - 30 years 310 
31 - 50 320 31 - 50 years 320 
454 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
26 • Chromium 
26.1 Introduction 
Chromium (Cr) is a chemical elem ent with a symbol Cr and atomic mas s of 51.9961 Da. 
It exits in each of the oxidation states from -2 to +6, with only trivalent Cr (+3) and hexavalent 
Cr (+6) being the m ost often studied in relation to human health (Nielsen, 2012). Other forms 
such as chromium III and chromium VI are associated with industrial exposure. A trivalent Cr 
is the most common form found in nature due to its oxidation stability state and biologically 
active form, whereby all forms of chromium can be toxic at high levels, but hexavalent 
comp ounds, a by-product of manu facturing stainless steel, pigmen ts, chroma te chemicals and 
other industrial products, is the most oxidizing states and fairly unstable. It is mor e toxic in the 
body than its trivalent form. 
26.2 Functions 
Chrom ium is an essential trace element in regulating many m etabolic processes as 
metalloenzym es in the body. Chromium also helps in regulating m etabolism of fat and 
carbohydrates. In addition, it stimulates fatty acid and cholesterol synthesis, which are crucial 
for brain function and other body processes (Mertz, 1993). A growing body of evidence 
indicates that Cr is essential for normal glucose tolerance that has been found to aid in optimal 
insulin action regulation, by enhancing the activity of insulin receptor and thus increasing insulin 
signal transduction and sensitivity (Chen et al., 2009; Yin & Phung, 2015). Moreover, it was also 
reported that chromium suppleme ntation may improve glucose tolerance in children, adults 
and elderly with impaired glucose tolerance and/or dyslipidaemia (Ama to, Morales & Yen, 2000; 
Kim et al., 2011). A  current understanding of the positive effect of dietary Cr on insulin action 
is based on several in-vitro and in vivo experimental studies. Vincent and his colleagues (2004) 
proposed a first model of the role of Cr as enhancer on insulin activity, in which the moveme nt 
of Cr into the cell is stimulated by an activation of the insulin receptor. The intracellular Cr binds 
to a peptide to become the low-molecular-weight chromium-binding substance (LMWCr ). In 
proportion to its Cr concentration, the LMWCr activates the insulin receptor and enhance its 
activity. W hen the blood glucose level becomes normal and the insulin level decreases, the 
LMW Cr is released from the cell and this terminates its effects (Vincent, 2004). Moreove r, Cr 
may enhance insulin action by improving insulin signaling in skeletal muscle. This was reported 
by Chen et al. (2009), in a study of genetically obese and insulin resistant of male mice that had 
been given a chromium-containing milk powder. In 7 weeks result showed  that chrom ium 
supplementation improved insulin signaling in skeletal muscle in these diabetic mice. 
26.3 Metabolism 
Chromium is present in the diet both in the inorganic and organically complexed forms. 
Cr form s coordination comp ounds and chelates that have made it more available for absorption 
and transport in small intestines. Based on the metabolic balance studies both in animal and 
hum ans, the rate of chromium absorption from food was estimated to range between 0.4% 
and 2.5% and varies depending on the chromium complex ingested (DiSilvestro & Dy, 2007). 
Once absorbed, Cr is distributed to various tissues such as liver, spleen, kidney, soft tissue and 
bone. It is estimated that norm al levels of blood Cr in humans  is between 20 to 30m g/L. In 
general, the Cr bioavailability is relatively low, with most orally ingested Cr in human appears 
455 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Ch romium 
to be unabsorbed and is excreted in the faeces (Me rtz, 1993), whe reas most absorbed Cr is 
excreted rapidly in the urine, primarily through the kidney and also small amounts is excreted 
in perspiration and bile. 
The absorption of Cr is inversely proportional to the Cr intake in humans. The efficacy 
of absorption of chromium  depends on other factors including the chemical properties of the 
ingested source and on the presence of other dietary constituents. Both intestinal (endogenous) 
and dietary (exogenous) factors have been demo nstrated to alter the bioavailability of chromium 
in the sma ll intestine. Most chrom ium com pounds are soluble at the pH of the stomach and less 
soluble hydroxides may form  when the pH is increased. The environment of the gastrointestinal 
tracts and ligands provided by foods and supplements are important for mineral absorption. 
Bioavailability of the dietary Cr can be influenced by several dietary substances such as vitamin 
C, carbohydrates, oxalate and iron intake (Mertz, 1993; Vincent, 2004). 
A  higher bioavailability of dietary Cr can be achieved by increasing the content of vitamin 
C. absorption of dietary Cr is enhanced in animals fed concomitantly with chromium III chloride 
and ascorbic acid (Do wling, Offenbacher & Pi-Sunyer, 198 9). Similar effect was found in human, 
in which the absorption of Cr as measured by blood plasma  Cr levels was increased significantly 
in wom en who was given 1mg chromium and 100mg ascorbic acid simultaneously compared 
to wom en without ascorbic acid (Offenbacher, 1994). 
Carbohydrate intake has been show n to alter the Cr bioavailability. The effects of types 
of carbohydrates (simple vs. complex carbohydrates) on urinary Cr excretion were also 
investigated in animal and human s tudies. Animals fed 51 Cr-labelled chrom ium  III chloride 
concom itantly w ith starch found a significant higher level of Cr in blood and tissue than that of 
the m ice fed w ith chromium III chloride mixed with sucrose, fructose or glucose (Seaborn & 
Stoecker, 1989). Similar effect was also reported in human Cr supplementation trial in healthy 
adults, the urinary Cr excretion was significantly higher during the simple sugar diets period 
than after consuming the complex diet (Kozlovsky et al., 1986). In general, diets high in simple 
sugars such as sucrose, fructose and/or glucose significantly increased urinary excretion of Cr 
by 10 to 200%, without any changes in absorption rates (Kozlovsky et al., 19 86). Phytate, a salt 
of phytic acid, is w idely distributed in plant-based foods. High intake of phytate impaired Cr 
absorption, w hereas oxalate that is also widely found in vegetables and plants-based products 
significantly increases Cr transport by increases in Cr in the blood and tissues levels. 
A n interaction between Cr and iron is thought to be linked to the shared binding sites on 
transferrin, in which Cr comp etes for one of the binding sites on transferrin. The negative effects 
of iron on Cr absorption was demonstrated for the first time  by Sargent and his colleagues 
(1979 ) that iron overload in hereditary hemochroma tosis may interfere with Cr transport by 
com peting for transferrin binding sites, consequently leading to the pathogenesis of diabetes 
me llitus amo ng patients with hemo chromato sis. A significant low level of plasma  Cr was found 
in patient with hemochromatosis than in iron-depleted patients. This observation was further 
supported in nume rous studies, whereby high levels of urinary unbound Cr excretion and a 
sm aller blood pool of Cr due to the saturation of transferrin by iron among patients with 
hem ochromatosis (Lim, Sargent & Kusubov, 1983). Hence, it has been hypothesised that the 
diabetes associated with hemochrom atosis is caused by the decreased binding and transport 
of Cr and subsequently increases losses of Cr from the body (Lukaski, Siders & Penland, 2007). 
456 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Ch romium 
26.4 Deficiency 
Although there is no clinically defined cut-off point of Cr deficiency, several clinical cases 
associated with low  Cr levels have been previously reported among patients w ith prolonged 
intravenous parenteral nutrition without supplem entation of dietary chromium. Symptom s of 
Cr deficiency include peripheral neuropathy, ataxia, weight loss and hyperglycaemia; however, 
re-administration of chromium supplementation to the parenteral nutrition solution wo uld help 
to correct these abnormalities (Jeejeebhoy et al., 1977; Me rtz, 1993). In animal models, it 
show ed that Cr deficiency causes a syndrome of glucose intolerance similar to clinical diabetes 
(Chen et al., 2009). Certain groups of people such as the elderly and the young are at high risk 
of dietary Cr deficiency, especially when their diets are low in chromium. Another underlying 
cause attributed to the fact that tissue levels of chromium tend to decrease with age that could 
predispose the older people to have an increased risk of type-II diabetes. 
Although it is generally thought that Cr is essential in enhancing the insulin action and 
therefore Cr deficiency m ay result in imp aired glucose tolerance. Cr insufficiency has been 
hypothesized to be a contributing factor to the developmen t of diabetes mellitus (Sharma  et al., 
2011). In a Cr supplementation trial conducted in China, w here 180 diabetic adults were 
assigned into three groups namely as 200µg, 1,000µg chromium  picolinate daily and the 
controls for 4 mon ths to assess the effect of daily chromium on glucose homeostasis status 
indicators, as assessed by fasting glucose and insulin, glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) and 
2-hour glucose tolerance test (Ande rson et al., 1997). A significant reduction was found in 
fasting and 2-hour insulin levels in both supplemented groups compared to those in the control 
group. In addition, a higher daily dosage of 1,000mg group showed  significantly greater 
decreases in the levels of HbA1c and 2-hour glucose levels than those in other groups. The 
significant reductions in both fasting glucose and insulin levels and HbA1c levels were also 
observed at the end of 4-month trial. 
Anoth er study am ong patients with newly onset type-II diabetes showed a beneficial 
effect of chromium supplementation on glycaemia control and blood lipid profile among those 
who had been supplemented 42µg Cr daily for 3 months period (Sharma et al., 2011). On the 
contrary, in another recent meta-analysis of nine randomized controlled trials, comprising a 
total of 440 diabetic patients who were supplemented with daily chromium between 200(g and 
1,000µg failed to show any beneficial effects on fasting glucose levels, as only single indicator 
used for glucose homeostasis status (Bailey, 2014). A large scale randomized controlled trials 
of Cr supplementation are warranted to further investigation on the dosages and duration 
needed to demonstrate the effectiveness of chromium on the treatment of type-II diabetes. 
26.5 Sources 
Although chromium is a naturally occurring element that are mainly found in soil, rocks 
and plants, but the amount in food is very variable, depending on the chromium content of the 
soils. Chromium  in foods can be degraded during physical refining and processing. Several 
common foods that have significant amount of chromium based on micrograms  per 100gram 
of food are given in Table 26.1. In general, meat and meat products, high bran cereals, pulses, 
legum es, nuts, egg yolk and some fruits and vegetables are good sources of dietary chromium. 
W hole grains have more Cr content than that of a refined grain. Diets high in sim ple sugars such 
457 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Ch romium 
as sucrose and fructose are usually low in chrom ium content and it may actually promote 
chromium  excretion. Moreover, several chromium compounds have been added in food such 
as chromium  chloride and its hexahydrate, chrom ium  sulphate and its hexahydrate (EFSA, 
2014). 
Table 26.1. Chrom ium content of foods 
Cereal and cereal products 
W holemeal flour 21 
Barley (wholegrain) 13 
M aize (wholegrain) 9
Starchy root and tuber products 
Potatoes (mashed) 1
N ut and seed products 
Brazil nut 100 
Hazelnut 12 
Vegetable and vegetable products 
Tom ato 20 
M ushroom 17 
Broccoli 16 
Fruit and fruit products 
D ate (dried) 29 
Pear 27 
M eat and poultry products 
Pork chop 10 
Egg yolk 6
Beef 3
Fish, seafood and shellfish products 
M ussel 128 
O yster 57 
Brown shrimp 26 
Herring 2
Types µg/100g 
Source: Food Composition and Nutrition Table of Germany (2008) 
458 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Ch romium 
26.6 Setting Requirements and Recom mended Intake 
Limited information is available to determine an Estimated Average Requireme nt (EAR) 
and in order to calculate an RDA  values for chromium, an adequate intake (AI) was instead 
developed by the Food and Nutrition Board of the US Institute of Medicine (IOM, 2001). On the 
contrary, ESFA  guidelines should not be followed since there is no specific requirement guideline 
defined for dietary chromium at this moment du e to uncertainty in terms of the functional 
essentiality of trivalent chromium on health outcomes in both animals and hum ans (ESFA , 
2014). 
One of the major challenging issues is related to assessme nt of Cr nutritional status in 
biological tissues and fluids due to its very low levels in these tissues. Currently there is no 
reliable, sensitive and specific indicator or biomarker to assess nutritional Cr status, making it 
difficult to estimate and compare the prevalence and severity of Cr deficiency in the population. 
How ever, the current status of nutritional Cr assessmen t is primar ily based on Cr concentrations 
in blood, urine and hair as proxy measures of Cr nutritional status (Gibson, 2005). It is generally 
established that serum  Cr levels is relatively high in newborns and the Cr levels, in particularly 
trivalent Cr levels has been reported to decrease with advancing age and pregnancy. In addition, 
a significant age-related decrease in the Cr levels in hair, sweat, and urine has also been 
reported. 
The primary criterion used to establish an Estima ted Safe and Ade quate D aily D ietary 
level of dietary Cr that sufficient to meet the chromium requiremen ts for populations throughout 
the lifespans (IOM, 2001). There w as no documentation on the functional criteria to assess 
chrom ium  status in response to dietary chromium intakes. The determination of RDA  for dietary 
chrom ium is derived from  AI values, which was obtained from an Estimated Safe and A dequate 
Daily Dietary Intake ranges reported in various studies among different populations across the 
lifespans (IOM, 2001). 
Infants 
The recom mended intakes of dietary chromium  in infants from aged 0 through 12- 
months of age was based on an average dietary Cr intake of infants principally fed human milk 
(IOM,  2001). It is estima ted that daily energy intake for infants between 0 to 12 months is 
845kcal, in which huma n milk provides 750 kcal/ L. During the first 6 mo nths of exclusive 
breastfeeding, the average volume of human milk consumed by the infant is approximately 
0.6L/ day. An estimated chromium intake from human milk based on an average concentration 
of 0.25 µg/ L w ould be 0.15 µg per day (0.6 x 0.25). Additional dietary chromium from 
complementary foods was taken into account for infants after 6-months of age and it is 
estima ted to be 5.36 µg per day. Hence the adequate amou nt of chromium  consumed  from 
both human milk and complementary foods would be 5.5 µg per day (0.15 + 5.36). 
AI for infants 
0 - 6 m onths 0.2 µg/ day 
7 - 12  m onths 5.5 µg/ day 
459 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Ch romium 
Children and Adolescents 
A I for these children and adolescents from different age groups has been extrapolated 
from  adults aged between 19 years and 30 years according to gender. 
AI for children 
1 to 3 years 11 µg/  day 
4 to 8 years 15 µg/ day 
AI for Boys 
9 to 13 years 25 µg/ day 
14 t o 18 years 35 µg/ day 
AI for Girls 
9 to 13 years 21 µg/ day 
14 t o 18 years 24 µg/ day 
Adults 
Similar approach was used for adults ages from 19 years through 50 years based on the 
m ean daily intakes of dietary chromium. It has been documented that the mean chromium 
intake of 13.4 µg/ 1,000 kcal and an estima ted mean daily energy intake of 2,800 kcal and 1,850 
kcal for men and wome n aged betw een 19 and 30 years, respectively, and 2,550 kcal and 1,750 
kcal for men and w omen aged 31 to 50 years from  the Third National Health and N utrition 
Exam ination survey (NHAN ES III, 1988-1994) (Briefel et al., 1995). These highest intake levels 
of these adults reported were then used to establish AI estimates for dietary chromium 
according to gender. Thus, the AI for men is 35 µg/ day (2,800 x13.4) and 25 µg/ day (1,850 x 
13.4), after rounding. 
AI for M en 
19 to 50 years 35 µg/day 
AI for Wom en 
19 to 50 years 25 µg/day 
Adults Ages 51 years and older 
A n estim ated chromium intake of well-balanced diet in a day for adults was 13.4 µg/ 
1,000 kcal and median energy intakes for adult men and wome n aged 51 and older were 2,100 
and 1,500 kcal per day, respectively. The energy needs for older men and wome n aged more 
than 70 years are 1,700 and 1,300 kcal per day, respectively (Briefel et al., 1995). Calculation 
460 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Ch romium 
of gender-specific AI for these older adults is based on the highest intake level for adults aged 
51 years and older. Thus, the AI is calculated for men and wo me n are 30 µg/ day (2,100 x 13.4) 
and 20 µg/ day (1,500 x 13.4) after rounding.  
AI for Men 
51 - 70 years 30 µg/ day 
>70 years 30 µg/ day 
AI for Women 
51 - 70 years 20 µg/day  
>70 years 20 µg/day 
Pregnancy  and Lactation 
It is established that chromium  depletion is common a mong pregnant wome n and also 
among  w ome n with multiple pregnancies. Since there was no inform ation pertaining to 
additional chromium requirement for women during pregnancy, the AI is set up based on 
extrapolated values from adolescent girls and adult women by taking into consideration 
additional weight gain observed during pregnancy. Numero us evidences have been we ll 
docume nted that a median weight gain of 16 kg is significantly associated with good pregnancy 
outcomes. Hence, additional 16 kg is included to the reference weight for adolescent girls and 
adult women for extrapolation. 
On the other hand, establishment of AI for w om en during lactation is based on the 
chrom ium intake needed to compensate the chromium  secreted in human milk and the AI for 
non-pregnant women. Based on the absorption rate of chromium of 1%, additional 20 µg of 
chrom ium must be consume d in a day in order to compens ate for the milk losses. Hence, 
approximately 20 µg is required to be added to the AI for adolescent girls and adult women. 
AI for Pregnancy 
14 t o 18 years 29 µg/day 
19 to 30 years 30 µg/day 
31 to 50 years 30 µg/day 
AI for Lactation 
14 t o 18 years 44 µg/day 
19 to 30 years 45 µg/day 
31 to 50 years 45 µg/day 
461 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Ch romium 
26.8 Tolerable upper intake levels 
Little evidence has been documented that trivalent Cr is toxic to hum ans. Scant 
inform ation of serious adverse effects associated with excess intake of Cr from foods has been 
found. In general, the toxicity from the nutritional Cr levels is considered to be low and rare 
because ingested Cr is poorly absorbed, and most absorbed Cr is rapidly excreted from the 
body through urine (Nielsen, 2012). Moreove r, very limited evidence on adverse effects with 
excess intake of chromium from food or supplements up to a dose of 1 mg per day has been 
reported on health outcome s (ESFA, 2014), therefore, a tolerable upper intake level (UL) for 
chromium  was not established. 
26.9 R esearch recommendations 
A lthough it is generally recognised nutritional Cr deficiency appeared to be widespread 
in populations throughout the lifecycle, particularly in older adults and pregnant women, but 
several major issues and challenges in Cr research still remain unresolved. The challenges, 
such as the optimal Cr status of the populations, the chemistry of Cr as a dietary component 
and its bioavailability and the optimal levels of Cr in the body in achieving and maintaining good 
health and well-being of the populations. Therefore, a several priority areas of research are 
highly recomm ended namely, 
• A development of reliable, sensitive and specific biomarker to assess the Cr nutritional 
status in humans  in order to substantially imp rove the scientific basis on the optimal 
requirement of chromium on health in any populations of interest 
• To estimate the Cr requirement using reliable method of assessme nt amon g populations 
of different age groups and of different physiological groups 
• To assess the possible negative health effects associated with a marginal Cr deficiency 
in populations throughout the lifespans 
462 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Ch romium 
26.10 References 
Am ato P , Morales AJ & Yen SS (2000). Effects of chromium  picolinate supplemen tation on 
insulin sensitivity, serum lipids, and body composition in healthy, nonobese, older men 
and women. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 55:M260-M263. 
Ander son RA, Cheng N, Bryden NA, Polansky MM , Cheng N, Chi J & Feng J (1997). Elevated 
intakes of supplemental chromium  improve glucose and insulin variables in individuals 
with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes 46:1786-1791. 
Bailey CH (2014). Improved meta-analytic methods show no effect of chromium supplements 
on fasting glucose. Biol Trace Elem Res 157:1-8. 
Briefel RR, McDowell MA, A laimo K, Caughman CR, Bischof AL, Carroll M D & Johnson CL. 
Total energy intake of the US  population: the third National Health and Nutrition 
Exam ination Survey, 1988-1991. Am J Clin Nutr 1995 ; 62:1072S-1080S. 
Chen WY, Chen CJ, Liu CH & M ao FC (2009). Chromium supplementation enhances insulin 
signalling in skeletal muscle of obese KK/HlJ diabetic mice. Diabetes Obes Metab 11:293- 
303. 
D iSilvestro RA & D y E (2007). Comparison of acute absorption of com m ercially available 
chrom ium supplements. J Trace Elem Med Biol 21:120-124. 
D owling HJ, Offenbacher EG & P i-Sunyer FX (1989). Absorption of inorganic, trivalent 
chrom ium from the vascularly perfused rat small intestine. J Nutr 119:1138-1145. 
EFS A , European Food Safety Authority (2014). Panel on Dietetic Products. Scientific Opinion on 
Dietary Re ference Values for chrom ium . EFSA J 12(10). Available at: 
http://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/efsajournal/pub/3845. Accessed 20th June 2016. 
Food Compo sition and Nutrition Tables of Germany (2008 ). The 7 th revised and comp leted 
edition of Food Composition and Nutrition Tables of Germany. SW  Souci, W Fachma nn 
& H Kraut. Wissenschaftliche Verlagsgesellschaft mbH, Stuttgart, Germany. 
Gibson RS (2005). Principles of nutritional assessment, 2nd ed. Oxford University Press, UK. 
IOM , Institute of Medicine (2001). Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, 
Boron, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Ma nganese, M olybedum , Nickel, Silicon, 
Vanadium and Zinc: A Report of the Panel on Micronutrients, Subcommittees on Upper 
Reference Levels of N utritions and of Interpretation and Uses of Dietary Reference 
Intakes, and the Standing Comm ittee on the Scientific Evaluation of Dietary Reference 
Intakes. Washington. 
IOM , Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board (2006). Dietary reference intakes: the 
essential guide to nutrient requirements. Otten JJ, Hellwig JP & Meyers LD eds. 
Washi ngton, D.C.: National Academ y Press; 297-303. 
463 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Ch romium 
Jeejeebhoy KN, Chu RC, Marliss EB, Greenberg GR &  Bruce-Robertson A (1977). Chromium 
deficiency, glucose intolerance and neuropathy reversed by chromium supplementation 
in a patient receiving long term total parenteral nutrition. Am J Clin Nutr 30:531-538. 
Kim CW, Kim BT, Park KH, Kim KM , Lee DJ, Yang SW & Joo NS  (2011). Effects of short-term 
chrom ium supplementation on insulin sensitivity and body composition in overweight 
children: randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled study. J Nu tr Biochem 22:1030- 
1034. 
Kozlovsky AS, Moser PB, Reiser S & Anderson RA (198 6). Effects of diets high in simple sugars 
on urinary chromium  losses. Metabolism 35:515-518 
Lim TH, Sargent T 3rd & Kusubov N (1983). Kinetics of trace eleme nt chromium (III) in the 
hum an body. Am J Physiol 244:R445-454. 
Lukaski HC, Siders WA & Penland JG (2007). Chromium picolinate supplementation in women: 
effects on body weight, composition, and iron status. N utrition 23:187-195. 
M ertz W (1993). Chromium in human nutrition: a review. J Nutr 123:626-633. 
N ielsen FH (2012). Manganese , Molybdenum, Boron, Chromium, and other trace elements. In: 
Erdm an JJ, Macdonald I & Zelssel S, eds. Present Knowledge of Nutrition: John Wiley 
&  Sons, Inc. 
O ffenbacher EG (1994). Promotion of chrom ium  absorption by ascorbic acid. Trace Elem 
Electolytes 11:178. 
Sa rgent T 3rd, Lim TH &  Jenson RL (197 9). Reduced chromium retention in patients with 
hem ochroma tosis, a possible basis of hemo chromatotic diabetes. Me tabolism 28:70- 
79. 
Seaborn CD &  Stoecker BJ (1989). Effects of starch, sucrose, fructose and glucose on 
chrom ium absorption and tissue concentrations in obese and lean m ice. J Nutr 
119:1444-1451. 
Sharm a S, Agrawal RP , Choudhary M, Jain S, Goy al S &  Agarwal V (2011).Beneficial effect of 
chromium supplementation on glucose, HbA1C  and lipid variables in individuals with 
new ly onset type-2 diabetes. J Trace Elem Med Biol 25:149-153. 
Vincent JB (2004). Recent advances in the nutritional biochemistry of trivalent chromium. Proc 
N utr Soc 63:41-47. 
Yin RV & Phung OJ (2015). Hemoglobin and fasting plasm a glucose in patients with diabetes 
m ellitus. Nutr J 14:14. 
M alaysia (2017)* 
Age group RNI (µg/day) Age group RD A (µg/day) 
IOM  (2001) 
464 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Ch romium 
Appendix 26.1 C omparison of recommended intake for Chromium : RNI Malaysia (2017) and RDA 
of IO M (2001) 
Infants 
0 - 6 months 0.2 0 - 6 months 0.2 
7 - 12 months 5.5 7 - 12 months 5.5 
Children 
1 - 3 years 11.0 1 - 3 years 11.0 
4 - 8 years 15.0 4 - 8 years 15.0 
Boys 
9 - 13 years 25.0 9 - 13 years 25.0 
14 - 18 years 35.0 14 - 18 years 35.0 
G irls 
9 - 13 years 21.0 9 - 13 years 21.0 
14 - 18 years 24.0 14 - 18 years 24.0 
M en 
19 - 30 years 35.0 19 - 30 years 35.0 
31 - 50 years 35.0 31 - 50 years 35.0 
50 - 70 years 30.0 50 - 70 years 30.0 
>70 years 30.0 >70 years 30.0 
W omen 
19 - 30 years 25.0 19 - 30 years 25.0 
31 - 50 years 25.0 31 - 50 years 25.0 
50 - 70 years 20.0 50 - 70 years 20.0 
>70 years 20.2 >70 years 20.2 
Pregnancy 
≤1 years 29.0 ≤18 years 29.0 
19 - 30 years 30.0 19 - 30 years 30.0 
31 - 50 years 30.0 31 - 50 years 30.0 
Lactation 
≤18 years 44.0 ≤18 years 44.0 
19 - 30 years 45.0 19 - 30 years 45.0 
31 - 50 years 45.0 31 - 50years 45.0 
* Refer to Adequate Intake (AI). 
465 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
27 Copper 
27.1 Introduction 
Copper (Cu) is a soft, ductile and conductive metal with symbol Cu and atomic number 
of 29. Found in the earth crust, it is the first me tal mined by humans and has since been used 
w idely as electrical wires and industrial alloys. Copper is also an essential trace element that is 
required in the cellular processes of electron transfer in hum ans. A typical adult contains 
approximately 100mg Cu, which is distributed in the skeletal muscle, skin, bone ma rrow, liver 
and plasma. While copper mainly exists as Cu (II) in the hum an body, its ability to shift between 
oxidation forms of cuprous (Cu 1+ ) and cupric (Cu 2+ ) underpins its impor tant roles in oxidation- 
reduction reactions (Collins and Klevay 2011, EFSA, 2015). 
27.2 Functions 
A s a component of a number of metallo-enzym es, copper primarily functions as oxidases 
in the reduction of molecular oxygen. There are approximately 12 copper-containing enzyme s 
in human bod y, including the cytochrom e C oxidase, am ine oxidases, ceruloplasmin, 
copper/zinc superoxide dism utase (Cu/Zn SO D), dopam ine beta-hydroxylase, and others. 
Therefore, copper is involved in diverse body functions including cellular respiration, iron 
m etabolism, a ntioxidant defense, connective tissue formation, and n eurotransmitter 
biosynthesis. 
Ceruloplasmin is the principal copper-carrying protein in hum an body. It accounts for 80- 
95% of the copper in plasma (EFS A, 2015) and 3% of total copper in the body. Besides 
functioning as the transporter of copper to cells, ceruloplasmin is a ferroxidase enzyme  that 
oxidizes ferrous iron (Fe 2+ ) to ferric iron (Fe 3+ ) w hich is essential in the mobilization of iron for 
red blood cell synthesis. 
27.3 M etabolism 
The uptake, distribution, storage and excretion of copper is tightly regulated under 
home ostatic control by the hum an body. Dietary copper is absorbed primarily as cuprous (Cu 1+ )
in the small intestines, mainly at the duodenum. Copper is taken into the enterocytes via the 
copper transporter I (Ctr1), and subsequently transported by albumin, transcuprein, and low 
m olecular weight copper-histidine complexes in the portal circulation to the liver. In the liver, 
copper is either stored in metallothionein, or bound to one of 3 series of copper chaperones 
(CCS, Cox17, Atox1) for circulation to target tissues. CCS and Cox 17 are the copper chaperones 
for superoxide dismutase 1 and cytochrome c oxygenase, respectively. A tox1 is the chaperone 
for the two ATPases, of which ATP7A delivers copper to tyrosinase while ATP7B delivers copper 
to lysyl oxidase and ceruloplasmin (de Romana et al., 2011). Copper is excreted mainly through 
the bile (98%) (Wijmenga and Klomp 2004), and hence presence of copper exporter ATP7B is 
especially important for biliary excretion of copper. Less copper is excreted in the urine, skin 
and sweat. 
In general, the absorption of copper depends on the amount ingested and the presence 
of other dietary components (Ellingsen, Horn and Aaseth, 2007). It is estimated that 50% of 
dietary copper is absorbed in humans across all ages and life stages (EF SA , 2015). The increase 
466 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Co pp er 
in copper absorption will also increase the turnover of copper. In cases of deficiency or low 
dietary intake such as intakes below 1 mg/day, absorption of copper is mo re than 50%. 
However, the efficiency of absorption reduced to less than 20% when copper intakes are above 
5mg/day (Turnlund, 19 98 ). Therefore, copper bioavailability is inversely related to dietary copper 
intake. 
The enhancers of copper absorption are amino acids (especially histidine and cysteine), 
and organic acids such as citric, gluconic, lactic, acetic and malic acids. On the contrary, 
presence of divalent cations such as iron and zinc and alkaline environment m ay inhibit copper 
absorption. 
High levels of dietary iron intake may reduce copper absorption. Copper absorption has 
been found to be low er in infants fed a formula with higher iron concentration compared to 
those fed the same formula with lower iron concentration (IO M , 2006). It has been postulated 
that som e copper may enter enterocytes through the iron transport channel (divalent metal 
transporter 1, DM TI) besides copper transporter 1 (Ctr1) at the apical m emb rane of 
enterocyctes. Therefore, high levels of iron may reduce copper absorption (Sharp, 2004). 
High intake of zinc ( ≥50m g/day or 760µmol) for extended periods can affect intestinal 
absorption of copper (WHO /FAO , 2004; Linus Pauling Institute, 2016). Excessive zinc intake 
have been associated with excess intake from supplements (Mar et and Sandstead, 2006) and 
inappropriate use of denture cream (Hedera et al., 2009). High zinc intake has been shown in 
animal studies to increase the synthesis of metallothionein (EFSA , 2015). Because copper has 
higher affinity than zinc to metallothionein, copper will be trapped in enterocyctes and 
subsequently shed and excreted in faeces. 
27.4 Sources  
Copper is found in a wide variety of foods. Mos t copper in foods is found in the cupric 
state (Cu 2+ ) bound to organic compounds especially amino acids. The two rich dietary sources 
of copper are organ meats and shellfish, especially liver and oyster. Nuts and seeds are good 
plant sources of copper (Table 27.1). On the other hand, milk and dairy products are poor 
sources. Copper is supplemented in fortified food or supplements mainly in the form of copper 
sulfate (contains 25% copper). The other bioavailable forms of copper include cupric chloride 
(47% copper), cupric acetate (35%  copper) and copper carbonate (57% copper) (Baker, 199 9 ). 
467 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Cop per 
Table 27.1. Copper content of Foods 
µg/100g edible portion 
O rgan meats 
Beef, liver, cooked, pan-fried 14587 
Beef, liver, raw 9755 
D uck, liver, raw 5961 
Beef, sweetbread, cooked, boiled 5100 
Beef, kidneys, cooked, simmered 563 
Shellfish 
O yster, cooked, moist heat 5707 
Lobster, cooked, moist heat 1550 
Crab, blue, cooked, moist heat 814 
Legumes, nuts, and seeds 
Cocoa, dry powder, unsweetened 3788 
Cashew nuts, dry roasted 2220 
Chocolate malt powder 1818 
Soy bean curd, sheet (tim-cok) 1600 
M ixed nuts, dry roasted, with peanuts 1520 
Pistachio nuts, dry roasted 1293 
Soy bean, white (kacang soya putih) 980 
Kidney beans, mature seeds, raw 958 
Shitake mushrooms 896 
Kacang kuda (chickpea) 880 
Kacang hijau (Gram, green / mung bean) 820 
Lentils, raw 754 
D al kuning (dhal, yellow) 710 
D al Mysore (dhal, Mysore / orange) 700 
Kacang merah (gram, red) 670 
Tem peh (fermented soy bean cake) 500 
Barley, hulled 498 
Sources: USDA  National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference, Nutrient Composition of Ma laysian Foods 
(Tee et al., 1997) 
468 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Co pp er 
Dr inking water, including water-based beverages is another important contributor to 
dietary copper. Due  to the widespread use of copper pipes, drinking water may contribute up 
to 50% of total copper intake if the copper content in drinking water is high (>1-2 mg/L) (EFSA, 
2015). Ac cording to the Malaysian Food Regulations (19 8 5), the m axim um p ermitted 
concentration of copper in packaged drinking water is 1000µg. This standard limit is lower than 
the international standard limits of 2000µg (WHO Gu idelines for Drinking Water Quality (2006)). 
A  study examining drinking w ater in Malaysia found that copper levels in drinking w ater are 
below the national and international standard limits. The copper concentration were 2.99 µg/L 
(in drinking water), 12.77 µg/L in mineral water, and 8.54 µg/L in tap water (Azlan et al., 2012). 
Given the low copper content in drinking water (<0.1mg/L), contribution of water to daily copper 
intake of Malaysians is unlikely to be high (or higher than 10%).   
However, the dietary intake of copper in Ma laysia remains unknow n. This is ma inly due 
to the non-availability of information on copper content for most foods in the local food 
comp osition database (Tee et al., 1997). On the other hand, according to dietary surveys in 
seven European countries, the average intake of copper ranged between 1.47 to 1.67mg/day 
(median intake 1.57mg/day) for men, and 1.20mg to 1.44mg/day (me dian intake 1.32mg/day) 
for women aged 18 to less than 65 years. The main food group contributing to dietary copper 
intake is grains and grain-based products in these countries due to the high consum ption of this 
food group (EFSA , 2015). 
27.5 Deficiency 
Because copper is found ubiquitously in foods, dietary copper deficiency is rare in 
human s. In early studies, cases of dietary copper deficiency have been docum ented in 
malnourished infants, premature and low-birth-weight infants fed cows ’ milk or on a poor diet 
lacking in copper, and patients receiving total parental nutrition un-supplemented with trace 
m inerals (Williams, 1983 ).  Nonetheless, copper deficiency is likely with excessive consum ption 
of zinc, prolonged use of certain medications, renal or gastrointestinal disorders that alter the 
excretion or absorption of copper. 
Given the various functions of copper in human body, deficiency in copper can result in 
a broad spectrum of clinical presentations. The more comm only recognized signs and 
sym ptoms  of deficiency include anemia (that is unresponsive to iron therapy), neutropenia, 
impaired immune function, skeletal demineralization, osteoporosis and other abnormalities of 
bone development (de Romana et al., 2011). Other less common symptoms  include hypo- or 
depigmentation of skin and hair, aneurysms, and neurological symptoms . 
Severe deficiency of copper can be a result of genetic defects in copper m etabolism. 
Men kes disease, also know n as the kinky hair syndrome, is an inherited disorder of copper 
deficiency caused by mutations of the copper export pump ATP 7A expressed in the placenta, 
gut and brain (Tumer and M oller, 2010). This X-linked lethal disorder of copper metabolism 
typically presents in males at 2-3 months of life with failure to thrive, delay in development, and 
seizures. Although copper are absorbed into the intestinal cells, they cannot be released into the 
circulation resulting in systemic copper deficiency. Consequently, copper accumulates in the 
blood-brain barrier and the cuproenzyme activity in the neurons reduced. M enkes disease can 
be recognized by the characteristic short, sparse, coarse, twisted, often-described-as ‘kinky’ 
469 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Cop per 
or ‘steel’ hair (Kaler, 2013). While Menkes disease is an extreme ly rare disease (1 in 300,000 
incidence rate), it causes progressive neurological impa irme nt, connective tissues disturbances, 
and death before the third year of life. 
Copper deficiency has been diagnosed based on  serum  an d p lasma copper 
concentrations, ceruloplasm in concentration, and erythrocyte superoxide dismutase activity. 
These bioma rkers’ levels respond to copper supplem entation and are low with copper depletion, 
how ever they may not be sensitive to marg inal copper deficiency. No single biomarker is 
sufficiently robust to determine requirements for copper (IOM,2001; EFSA, 2015). 
27.6 Factors affecting copper requirements 
The requirement for copper increases with age and is influenced by growth.  During 
pregnancy, copper requirement increased due to the synthesis of pregnancy products and 
increased fetal needs. Although metabolic adaptation could lead to increased copper absorption, 
limited data is available on the efficiency of this upregulation in meeting additional requirement 
during pregnancy. Similarly during lactation, copper requireme nt increases due to the secretion 
of copper (approximately 0.2mg/day) in breast milk (EFS A, 2015). 
In addition, copper requirement may be affected by prolonged use of certain drugs such 
as proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) and penicillamine.  Low pH environm ent induced by excessive 
antacid ingestion and prolonged use PPIs, may interfere the absorption of copper and decrease 
zinc body stores (Farrell et al., 2011, Plantone et al., 2015). Penicillamine is prescribed to 
enhance copper elimination in Wilson’s disease. It binds copper with sulfhydryl groups to form 
comp lex that can be excreted via urine (Hordyjewska, Popiolek and Kocot 2014). For individuals 
taking this medication without copper overload, they may have increased copper requirement 
due to the increased urinary excretion of Cu. 
27.7 Setting requirements and recommended intakes of copper 
Setting requireme nts for copper is a challenging one, due to the absence of robust, 
sensitive and specific bioma rkers or other indices to assess copper status in human  (EFSA, 
2015). The IOM (2001) set the requirement for copper based on a combination of indicators, 
including serum concentration of copper and ceruloplasm in, erythrocyte superoxide dismutase 
activity and platelet copper concentration in human depletion/repletion studies. On the other 
hand, the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC ) for Australia and Ministry of 
Health New Zealand (NHMR C, 2006), and the Eu ropean Food Safety Authority (EFSA, 2015) 
set their requirements based mainly on observed copper intake of their populations. For this 
reason, the Technical Sub-Committee (TSC) on Minerals and Trace Elements decided to adopt 
values from  FNB-IOM (2001). 
470 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Co pp er 
Infants 
The recom m ended intake of infants is based on observed mea n intake of copper among 
breast-fed infants. For younger infants aged 0 to 6 mo nths, the AI reflects the usual copper 
intake from human  milk, which is approximately 200 µg per day (250 µg/L x 0.78 L/day) after 
rounding. Taking into account the reference weight of 7kg, the AI is rounded up to 30 µg/kg/day 
or 200 µg/day. For the older infants aged 6 to 12 months, the AI is based on the average copper 
intake from compleme ntary foods (estimated to be 100 µg/day) in addition to human m ilk. With 
the declining concentration of copper in human milk after six months (200 µg/L) and human 
milk intake of 0.6 L/day, the copper intake from human milk is 120 µg per day. Therefore the AI 
is 24 µg/kg/day or 220 µg/day for a reference weight of 9kg. 
AI 
0-6 m onths 200 µg/day 
7-12 m onths 220 µg/day 
Children and Adolescents 
In the absence of data for children and adolescents, EAR  for copper are extrapolated 
from adult EAR based on metabolic weight (kg 0.75 ) for ages 1-18 years (FN B-IOM, 2001). The 
EAR  of the ages 1-3 years, 4-8 years, 9-13 years, and 14-18 years are 260 µg/day, 340 µg/day, 
540 µg/day, and 685 µg/day, respectively. The RNI is set as equal to E AR plus twice the 
coefficient variation (CV) of 15 percent (130 percent of the EA R).  
RN I 
1 - 3 years 340 µg/day 
4 - 8 years 440 µg/day 
9-13 y ears 700 µg/day 
14- 18  years 890 µg/day 
Adults 
The EAR  for adults is 700 µg/day and is set based on a combination of biochemical 
indicators. There are no differences in requirements between males and females (IOM, 2001). 
RN I 
19 - 30 years 900 µg/day 
31 - 50 years 900 µg/day 
50 - 70 years 900 µg/day 
> 70 years 900 µg/day 
471 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Cop per 
Pregnan cy and Lactation 
The EAR for pregnancy was based on EAR for adults plus additional requireme nt for fetal 
needs and pregnancy products. The amou nt of copper deposited in a full-term infant is 
estimated to be 13.7mg, while the copper content in products of pregnancy including placenta 
amniotic fluids and m aternal tissues are estimated to be 4.6g. These together add to a total 
18m g copper over the course of pregnancy or 67 µg/day (18mg/266 days). Taking into account 
65-70 percent bioavailability, the additional requiremen t for copper during pregnancy is 
estimated to be 100 µg/day. 
The EA R for lactation is determined based on the requireme nt to cover losses of copper 
secreted in human milk in addition to adult EA R. A ssum ing that 200 µg per day of copper is 
secreted in human milk and bioavailability of 65-70 percent, an additional 300 µg of copper is 
required per day during lactation. A dditional requirements for pregnancy (100 µg/day) and 
lactation (300 µg/day) were added to the EA Rs of adolescent girls (14-18 years) and women (19 
years and above), and rounded to the nearest 100 µg. 
R N I 
Pregnancy 
≤ 18 yea rs 1000 µg/day 
19 - 50 years 1000 µg/day 
Lactation 
≤ 18 yea rs 1300 µg/day 
19 - 50 years 1300 µg/day 
27.8 Tolerable upper intake level 
Tolerable upper intake level (UL) refers to the highest level of copper intake that is likely 
to have no risk of adverse effect to almost all individuals in a general population FNB -IOM 
(2001) set UL for copper based on potential liver dama ge as the critical adverse event. Doses 
up to 10mg daily have not reported to result in liver damage , and is hence set as the UL for 
adults including pregnant and lactating wome n. It was not possible to establish UL in infants 
due to the lack of sufficient data on adverse effects in this age group and concern for infants’ 
inability to cope with excess copper. For children and adolescents, UL is extrapolated from UL 
of adults based on reference body weight are as follows: 
472 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Co pp er 
Age UL 
Infants No t possible to establish. Sources of intake should be from food and formula only. 
Children 
1 - 3 years 1000 µg/day 
4 - 8 years 3000 µg/day 
Adolescents 
9 - 13 years 5000 µg/day 
14 - 18 years 8000 µg/day 
Adults 
19 - 30 years 10000 µg/day 
31 - 50 years 10000 µg/day 
50 - 70 years 10000 µg/day 
> 70 years 10000 µg/day 
Pregnancy 
≤ 18 years 8000 µg/day 
19 - 50 years 10000 µg/day 
Lactation 
≤ 18 years 8000 µg/day 
19 - 50 years 10000 µg/day 
Excessive intake of dietary copper is not a concern as copper level is under tight 
hom eostatic control under normal physiological condition. Copper toxicity is rare in general 
population without hereditary defect in copper homeostasis. However, acute copper poisoning 
may occur through industrial exposure to fumes, intake of contam inated beverages and 
contaminated water supplies (Bremner, 1998). Toxicity symptoms range from abdominal pain, 
nausea, vomiting and diarrhea to more severe symptoms such as liver dam age, kidney failure, 
coma and death. 
Individuals with immature liver function (Lonnerdal, 19 96 ) and genetic disorders 
(Wilson’s disease, Indian childhood cirrhosis, idiopathic copper toxicosis) affecting copper 
metabolism may be at risk of copper toxicity at significant lower intake levels. In the case of 
Wi lson’s disease, copper overloading may happen due to the deficiency of copper export pump 
ATP 7B caused by gene m utation. As results of impaired incorporation of copper into 
ceruloplasmin and decreased biliary excretion of copper, copper accumulate in many organs 
including the liver and brain. The clinical presentations are very diverse, consisting hepatic 
symp toms such as acute and chronic liver diseases, liver cirrhosis, neurological symptoms 
such as dystonia, tremor and cognitive and mood disorders (Chen et al., 2015). 
473 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Cop per 
27.9 R esearch recommendations 
• Currently, the M alaysian Food Comp osition Da tabase contains only copper content of 
103 legumes and vegetables extracted from  both published and unpublished reports 
(Tee et al., 1997). To assess dietary intake of copper, there is a need to determine the 
copper content of local foods from varying food groups. 
• Locally, the lack of dietary intake data on copper intake precluded identifying the most 
appropriate requirement for the M alaysian population. Food consump tion data or 
nationwide dietary survey should access dietary intake of copper at the population level. 
• A t global level, there is a need to collect dose-response data to evaluate the health effects 
of copper supplements. 
474 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Co pp er 
27.10 Reference 
Az lan A, Khoo HE, Idris MA, Ismail A & Razman M R (2012). Evaluation of minerals content of 
drinking water in Malaysia. Scientific World Journal 2012: 403574. 
Baker DH (1999). Cupric Oxide Should Not Be Used As  a Copper Supplemen t for Either Anima ls 
or Hum ans. J Nutr 129(12): 2278-2279. 
Bremn er I (1998) . M anifestations of copper excess. Am  J Clin Nutr 67(5 Suppl): 1069 S-1073S. 
Chen C, Shen B, Xiao JJ, Wu R, Duff Canning SJ & Wang XP (2015). Currently Clinical Views 
on Genetics of Wilson’s Disease. Chin Med J ( Engl) 128(13): 1826-1830. 
Collins JF & Klevay LM (2011). Copper. Adv Nutr 2(6): 520-522. 
de Rom ana DL, Olivares M, U auy R & Araya M  (2011). Risks and benefits of copper in light of 
new  insights of copper homeostasis. J Trace Elem Med Biol 25(1): 3-13. 
EFSA (2015). Scientific Opinion on Di etary Reference Values for copper. EFSA Jou rnal . N. a. A. 
N. EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products, European Food Safety Authority. 13: 4253. 
Ellingsen DG, Horn N & Aaseth J (2007). Copper. Handbook  on the toxicology of metals. G. F. 
Nordberg, B. A. Fowler, M. Nordberg and L. T. Friberg. San Diego, California, Academic 
Press: 529-546. 
Farrell CP , Morgan M, Rudolph DS, Hwang A, Albert NE, Calenzano MC, Wang X, Mercogliano 
G &  M ullin JM (2011). Proton Pump Inhibitors Interfere With Zinc Abs orption and Zinc 
Body Stores. Gastroenterology Research. 
Hedera P , Peltier A, Fink JK, Wilcock S, London Z & Brewer GJ (2009). Myelopolyneuropathy 
and pancytopenia due to copper deficiency and high zinc levels of unknown origin II. 
The denture cream is a primary source of excessive zinc. N eurotoxicology 30(6): 996- 
999. 
Hordyjewska A, Popiolek L & Kocot J (2014). The many “faces” of copper in me dicine and 
treatment. Biometals 27(4): 611-621. 
IOM (2001). Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron, Chrom ium, 
Co pper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybedum, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium and Zinc: A
Report of the Panel on Micronutrients, Su bcomm ittees on Upp er Reference Levels of 
Nu tritions and of Interpretation and Uses of Dietary Reference Intakes, and the Standing 
Comm ittee on the Scientific Evaluation of Dietary Reference Intakes. Washington. 
IOM  (2006). Dietary Reference Intakes: The Essential Guide to Nutrient Requirements. J. J. 
Ot ten, J. P . Hellwig and L. D. Meyers. Was hington, D.C, Na tional Aca demy  of Sciences: 
1344. 
475 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Cop per 
Kaler SG  (2013). Inborn errors of copper metabolism. Han db Clin Neurol 113: 1745-1754. 
Linus Pauling Institute. (2016). Copper. From 
http://lpi.oregonstate.edu/mic/minerals/copper#reference15. [Retrieved 29 June]. 
Lonnerdal B (1996). Bioavailability of copper. Am J Clin Nutr 63(5): 821S-829S. 
M aret W &  Sandstead HH (2006). Zinc requirements and the risks and benefits of zinc 
supplementation. J Trace Elem Med Biol 20(1): 3-18. 
M inistry of Health (1985). Food Regulations 1985. Ministry of Health Malaysia. 
N HMR C (2006). Nutrient Reference Values for Australia and New  Zealand: E xecutive Summary. 
Canberra Wel lington, National Health and Me dical Research Council; Mi nistry of Health 
N ew  Zealand. 
Plantone D, Renna R, Primiano G , Shukralla A &  Koudriavtseva T (2015). PPIs as possible risk 
factor for copper deficiency myelopathy. Journal of the Neurological Sciences 349(1-2): 
258-259. 
Sharp P (2004). The molecular basis of copper and iron interactions. Proc Nutr Soc 63(4): 563- 
569. 
Tee ES, Ismail MN, Nasir MA & I dris K (1997). N utrient comp osition of Malaysian foods. Kuala 
Lum pur, Institute for Medical Research. 
Tum er Z & Moller LB (2010). Menkes disease. Eur J Hum G enet 18(5): 511-518. 
Turnlund JR (1998 ). Human whole-body copper metabolism. Am J Clin N utr 67(5 Suppl): 960S- 
964S. 
U .S. D epartment of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service (2012). USDA National Nutrient 
Database for Standard Reference, Release 25. Nutrient Data Laboratory Home. 
W HO (2006). Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality: incorporating first addendum. Vol 1 
Recom mendations. 3rd ed. Geneva, World Health Organization. 
W HO/FAO (2004). Vitamin and mineral requirem ents in huma n nutrition. World Health 
O rganization, Food and Agriculture Organization. 
W ijmenga C & Klomp LW (2004). Molecular regulation of copper excretion in the liver. Proc Nutr 
Soc 63(1): 31-39. 
W illiams DM  (1983). Copper deficiency in humans. Semin  Hematol 20(2): 118-128. 
476 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Co pp er 
Age group AI (m g/day) Age group R D A (µg/day) 
M alaysia (201 7) 
Age group R N I (µg/day) 
IO M  (2001 ) ESFA (201 5) 
Appendix 27.1  Com parison of recom m ended intake for Copper: R N I M alaysia (201 7), R D A of IO M  (2001 ) and AI of ESFA (201 5) 
Infants 
0 - 6 m onths 200* 0 - 6 m onths 200* 
7 - 12 m onths 220* 7 - 12 m onths 220* 7 - 11 m onths 0.4 
Children 
1 - 3years 340 1 - 3years 340 1 - < 3years 0.7 
4 - 8 years 440 4 - 8 years 440 3 - < 10years 1.0 
Boys 
9  - 13 years 700 9  - 13 years 700 10 - <18 years 1.3 
14 - 18  years 8 9 0 14 - 18  years 8 9 0 
G irls 
9  - 13 years 700 9  - 13 years 700 10 - <18 years 1.1 
14 - 18  years 8 9 0 14 - 18  years 8 9 0 
M en 
19  - 30 years 9 00 19  - 30 years 9 00 ≥18 years 1.6 
31 - 50 years 9 00 31 - 50 years 9 00 
50 - 70 years 9 00 50 - 70 years 9 00 
>70 years 9 00 >70 years 9 00 
477 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Cop per 
Age group AI (m g/day) Age group R D A (µg/day) 
M alaysia (201 7) 
Age group R N I (µg/day) 
IO M  (2001 ) ESFA (201 5) 
W om en W om en W om en 
19  - 30 years 9 00 19  - 30 years 9 00 ≥18 years 1.3 
31 - 50 years 9 00 31 - 50 years 9 00 
50 - 70 years 9 00 50 - 70 years 9 00 
>70 years 9 00 >70 years 9 00 
Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy 
≤18  years 1,000 ≤18  years 1,000 1.5 
19  - 30 years 1,000 19  - 30 years 1,000 
31 - 50 years 1,000 31 - 50 years 1,000 
Lactation Lactation Lactation 
≤18  years 1,300 ≤18  years 1,300 1.5 
19  - 30 years 1,300 19  - 30 years 1,300 
31 - 50 years 1,300 31 - 50 years 1,300 
* Refer to A dequate Intake (A I). 
478 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
28 • Man ganese 
28.1 Introduction 
Manganese is a chemical element with the atomic symbol Mn. The atomic number and 
standard weight of manganese are 25 and 54.9 respectively. The appearance of manganese is 
in the form  of a solid metal and silvery metallic in colour. The manga nese metal was first isolated 
from m anganese dioxide by Johan G ottlieb G ahn in 1774 (Royal Society of Chemistry, 2017). 
In huma ns, manganese is a trace elem ent, usually present in low quantities (12-20mg ), 
predom inantly in either +2 or +3 oxidation states, and can be found mainly in the bones, liver, 
kidneys, pancreas, and small intestine. 
28.2 Functions 
The functions of manganese include as component of several metalloenzymes (e.g. 
superoxide dismutase), and a co-factor of other enzyme s involved particularly in macro-nutrient 
(carbohydrate, protein, and lipid) metabolism (e.g. pyruvate carboxylase in glycolysis); and in 
cartilage tissue and bone formation. The following are specific examples of the major role of 
manganese in human metabolism: 
Manganese superoxide dismutase 
Mangane se superoxide dismutase (M nS O D/SOD2 ) is a mem ber of the superoxide 
dismutase family together with iron. The major role of this enzym e is its protection against 
oxidative stress as this enzyme is able to convert toxic superoxide to form hydrogen peroxide 
and diatomic oxygen (Figure 28.1). Hence, MnSOD is often associated with chronic diseases/ 
condition such as ischemic heart disease, cancer, and ageing. 
Figure 28.1. The catalyzed reaction of MnSO D in prevention of oxidative stress 
Source: Cantala A (2012) 
Supe roxide anion 
Hy droxyl radical 
Hy drog en peroxide 
479 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
M anga nese 
A rginase contains four atoms of mangane se, is an important enzyme  in the urea cycle, 
w hich functions to convert ammonia from the breakdow n of proteins into urea for excretion. 
There are a total of five steps in the urea cycle and arginase is involved in the last step in which 
it hydrolyzes arginine to form ornithine and urea. 
G lutamine synthetase is an important enzym e in nitrogen metabolism for the ATP- 
dependent condensation of glutamate and amm onia to produce glutam ine. In this catalyzed 
reaction, ATP will phosphorylate glutamate to produce ADP and γ-glutamyl phosphate, which 
then reacts with ammonia for the formation of glutamine and inorganic phosphate. 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PE PCK) is involved in carbohydrate metabolism as 
one of the key enzymes in the gluconeogenesis pathway (form ation of glucose from non - 
carbohydrate sources). PEPCK is the rate-limiting enzyme, therefore the main control point of 
the gluconeogenesis pathway. In this step, the substrate oxaloacetate is decarboxylated and 
phosphorylated by PEPCK to form the product, phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP). Plasma  glucose 
levels were found to be lower in manganese-deficient rats, which may suggest the important 
role of manganese for the regulation of carbohydrate metabolism (Baly, Keen & Hurley, 1985). 
The other imp ortant roles of manganese include cartilage and bone development, and in 
w ould healing. Manganese is a co-factor for the enzym es glycosyltransferases, which are 
required for the synthesis of proteoglycans in the form ation of cartilage and bone. Besides 
glycosyltransferases, manganese also activates the enzym e prolidase which synthesizes proline 
for collagen formation in wound healing. 
28.3 M etabolism 
The total amount of manganese in the human body range between 12mg to 20mg, and 
it is distributed widely and uniformly in the tissues. In cells, manga nese is concentrated in the 
m itochondria and nucleus. Manganese is transported in the blood by the liver and is distributed 
to the extrahepatic tissues via bound transferrin. In terms of storage, manganese is mostly 
found in bones as part of hydroxyapatite, and is also concentrated in the liver, kidneys, and 
pancreas. The absorption of manganese from d ietary sources in the body is small and 
unabsorbed manganese is excreted in the faeces. 
In terms of interactions of manganese w ith other nutrients or compounds, it is reported 
that high intakes of calcium, phosphorus, and phytates impair the absorption of manganese 
(SCF, 1993; IOM, 2001; AT SDR, 2012). Howe ver, this m ay not be a serious effect because 
m anganese deficiency is rare among humans. 
480 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
M anga nese 
N uts 
Pecans 4.51 
A lmonds 2.29 
Peanuts 1.94 
Cereals & cereal products 
Instant oatmeal (prepared with water) 2.41 
W hole wheat bread 2.07 
Raisin bran cereal 1.32 - 5.12 
Brown rice, cooked 1.07 
Legumes 
N avy beans, cooked 0.53 
Lima beans, cooked 0.52 
Pinto beans, cooked 0.46 
Vegetables 
Spinach, cooked 0.93 
Sweet potato, cooked 0.27 
Fruits & fruits products 
Pineapple, raw 0.93 
Pineapple juice 0.50 
Beverages 
Tea (green) 0.33 - 1.29 
Tea (black) 0.15 - 0.63 
Food/Beverage mg/ 100g edible portion 
Sources: The Linus Pauling Institute’s Micronutrient Information Center (MIC) (2010) and USD A Food 
Composition Database (2015) 
28.4 Sources 
Manganese is ma inly found in plant-based foods with the greatest contribution from 
wh ole grains. Other food sources include nuts, fruits, leafy vegetables, legum es, and tea. A nim al 
based foods are low in m anganese so vegetarian diet may be richer in manganese w hen 
compar ed to omnivorous diet. Table 28.1 shows the manganese content of some  manganese- 
rich food and beverage sources. 
Table 28.1. Manganese content of food and beverage 
481 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
M anga nese 
Tap water do contain some amounts of manganese but is not a good source of this trace 
element. In a study by Azrina et al. (2011), the concentrations of majority of the inorganic 
elements in the tap water samples from all the 12 states of Peninsular Ma laysia w ere found to 
be low, and below the maximum perm itted levels recom me nded by the international standard 
limits for drinking water except for iron and manganese. The result showed that the maximum 
level of manganese in the tap water samples was 0.09mg/L, which was slightly higher than the 
international standard limit of 0.05mg/L. 
28.5 D eficiency 
D eficiency of manganese rarely occurs in human s. The docum ented sym ptoms of 
m anganese deficiency include nausea, vom iting, derm atitis, decreased growth of hair and nails, 
and changes in hair color. 
M anganese deficiency in animal studies have show n possible effect of impaired growth, 
impaired reproductive function, impaired glucose tolerance, and interference of norm al skeletal 
development (IOM, 2001). 
How ever, low dietary intakes of manganese w ere found to be associated with certain 
m etabolic pathw ay and may have a possible role in the cholesterol synthesis. This is shown in 
a study by Friedman et al. (1987) which exam ined the effects of manga nese depletion. In this 
study, seven male subjects were first fed with a manganese-adequate diet (2.59mg Mn/day) for 
3 weeks to establish baseline data, followed by a depletion phase of 39 days with diet of  0.11mg 
M n/day, and finally a repletion of tw o 5 days periods (total 10 days) with a diet of 1.53 and 
2.55mg Mn/day. The results showed that plasma cholesterol concentrations decreased during 
the depletion period, and there was no response to the repletion phase. 
A nother study by Penland and Johnson (1993) examined the effects of dietary calcium 
and manganese on menstrual cycle symp toms in young women. In this study, ten women were 
assigned to each of the four combinations for 39 days: 587 or 1336 mg calcium per day with 
1.0 or 5.6 mg manganese per day. The results show ed that increased calcium intake helped to 
reduce the menstrual cycle symptoms but subjects in the low manganese intake experienced 
symptoms of altered mo od and increased pain during preme nstrual phase despite higher intake 
of calcium.  
Up  to date, there are no reliable and validated biomarkers to determine manganese intake 
or status (EFSA, 2013). Based on the metabolism of manganese, the suggested bioma rkers for 
inadequate supply of manganese include a com bination of serum man ganese concentration 
and MnS OD act ivity, and possible blood arginase activity (Greger, 1999). However, there are 
several biom arkers to determine manganese intoxication primarily due to environmental factor 
such as inhalation. 
482 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
M anga nese 
28.6 Factors Affecting Manganese Requirements 
Maj ority of studies have show n that serum or plasma manganese concentrations respond 
to dietary intakes of individuals. However, there are some studies which showe d that the serum 
or plasma levels could be sensitive to large variations in manganese intake. This relationship 
requires further investigation. 
There are significant differences in absorption of ma nganese, with lower absorption in 
me n comp ared to wom en. This could be due to the iron status and high ferritin concentrations, 
which have shown  to be associated with low absorption of manganese (Finley Johnson & 
Johnson, 1994). 
In term s of excretion, it is still unclear whether urinary manga nese corresponds to low 
intakes of manganese in the diet. This is because there were studies which showed significant 
decrease in urinary manganese excretion when study subjects were in a depletion diet of 
manganese (Friedman et al., 1987; Freeland-Graves et al., 1988)  while  other studies showed 
no change in either high or low intakes of manganese (Greger et al., 1990; Da vis and Greger 
1992). 
28.7 Setting requireme nts and recomm ended intakes of manganese 
It is difficult to determine the manganese intake and status of the population since there 
are no reliable and validated bioma rkers. There is also insufficient data to set Estimated Average 
Requiremen t (EAR ) for mangan ese. Hence, Adequate Intake (AI) was proposed in both Institute 
of Medicine (IOM)  (2006) and European Food Safety Authority (EFSA)  (2013). The m ajor 
difference in AI values between IOM (2006) and EFSA (2013) is the latter did not discriminate 
the AI values by sex and stages of life-cycle for pregnancy and lactation. In the EFSA (2013), 
the AI values for pregnancy and lactation stage are the same as the AI values for adults. Based 
on the US Food and Drug Adm inistration Total Diet Study (1991-1997), there were differences 
in median intakes between males and females with the former having higher intakes. In addition, 
there is also sex difference in absorption for manganese with females absorbing significantly 
mor e than males. Hence, the Technical Sub-Com mittee (TSC) on Minerals and Trace Elements 
had decided to adopt the IOM R ecommendations (2006) for the AI values for manganese. The 
median intakes reported from the US Food and Drug Administration Total Diet Study (US TDS) 
was used as the basis to set the AI values for manganese. 
483 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
M anga nese 
Infants 
The AI value for infants aged 0-6 mo nths in the IOM R ecommenda tions (2006) was 
determined by multiplying the average milk volum e consump tion (0.78 L/day) with the average 
m anganese concentration in human milk (3.5 µg/L). This totalled up to 3 µg/day after rounding 
up. As for the older infants aged 7-12 months, the A I value is much higher compare d to the 
younger infants. This is due to the higher amounts of manganese available in compleme ntary 
foods when comp ared to human  milk. The A I value for the older infants w as determined by 
using the following two  methods: 1) mu ltiplying the average consumption of manganese for 6- 
and 12-mont h-old infants with the respective reference body weight for these two ages; and 2) 
the average intake of manganese using a reference body we ight me thod extrapolated from the 
adults. The values obtained from the first method ranged from 500 - 720 µg/day and the value 
from  method 2 came up to 567 µg/day (IOM 2006). Hence 600 µg/day was  set as the AI value 
for the older infants based on these two methods. 
AI for Infants 
0-6 m onths 0.003 m g/day 
7-12 months 0.6 m g/day 
Children and Adolescents 
The AI values for manganese are the same for both sexes in the age group 1-3 years old 
(1.2 m g/day) and 4-8 years old (1.5 mg/day). However, the recomm ended intakes for 
m anganese are more for the boys compared to the girls aged 9-18 years old. The AI values in 
the IOM R ecomme ndations (2006) were based from the data obtained from  US  TDS  which 
reported median intakes of 1.22 mg/day for children aged 1-3 years, 1.48 mg/day for children 
aged 4-8 years, 1.91 mg/day for boys aged 9-13 years, 1.57 mg/day for girls aged 9-13 years, 
2.17 mg /day for adolescent boys aged 14-18 years, and 1.55 mg/day for adolescent girls aged 
14-18 years. The final AI values were set by rounding up the median intakes of the respective 
groups. 
AI for children and adolescents 
1 - 3 years 1.2 m g/day 
4 - 8 years 1.5 m g/day 
Boys 
9 - 13 years 1.9 m g/day 
14 - 18 y ears 2.2 m g/day 
G irls 
9 - 13 years 1.6 m g/day 
14 - 18 y ears 1.6 m g/day 
484 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
M anga nese 
Adults 
The recomme nded intakes for manganese are also higher for adult men than for women. 
This is due to sex differences in the absorption and consumption of manganese. The AI values 
in the IO M Recommendat ions (2006) were based on the median intakes of 2.1 to 2.3 mg/day 
for men and 1.6 to 1.8 mg/day for women obtained from  the US TD S. The final AI values were 
set by taking the upper limit from the range of median intakes for both adult men and women. 
AI for adults 
Men 
19 - 30 years 2.3 mg/day 
31 - 50 years 2.3 mg/day 
50 - 70 years 2.3 mg/day 
> 70 years 2.3 mg/day 
Women 
19 - 30 years 1.8 mg/day 
31 - 50 years 1.8 mg/day 
50 - 70 years 1.8 mg/day 
> 70 years 1.8 mg/day 
Pregnancy  and Lactation 
According to the IOM R ecomm endations (2006), the recom men ded intakes for 
ma nganese are slightly higher in the stages of pregnancy and lactation when compared to adult 
wom en and adolescent girls. The A I values for pregnancy stage were determ ined via 
extrapolating up from adolescent girls and adult wom en. The values totalled up to around 2 
mg/day. This value is also consistent with the median intakes of manganese obtained from the 
US  TD S for this group. The AI value in the IOM Recommendations (2006) for lactation stage 
was  determ ined via rounding up the median intake of man ganese in lactating wome n (2.56 
mg/day) obtained from the data in the US TD S. 
AI for pregnancy and lactation 
Pregnancy 
14 -  1 8 years 2.0 mg/day 
19 - 50 years 2.0 mg/day 
Lactation 
14 -  1 8 years 2.6 mg/day 
19 - 50 years 2.6 mg/day 
485 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
M anga nese 
28.8 Tolerable upper intake levels 
The occurrence of toxicity from manganese usually occurs due to environmental factor 
such as contam inated air rather than from dietary intake. M anganese toxicity is rare, but 
individuals who inhale manganese-rich dust are known to experience Parkinson-like symptoms. 
M anganism is a permanent neurological disorder resulting from ma nganese toxicity and the 
sym ptoms include tremors, difficulty walking, and facial muscle spasms. 
Children tend to be more sensitive to manganese toxicity when compar ed to adults. A 
review by Zoni and Lucchini (2013) concluded som e evidence of possible developmental effects 
(cognitive, motor, and behavioural) when children are exposed to high levels of manganese 
from  either the environment or from drinking water. 
The following are exam ples of biomarkers used to determ ine ma nganese intoxication 
(Zheng et al., 2011): 
The com mon  bioma rker is by measuring blood mangane se. This method can only be 
used for group com parisons e.g. to distinguish betwee n groups exposed to m anganese vs 
unexposed groups, therefore only useful for epidemiological studies. 
A nother mo re sensitive biomar ker to determ ine manganese exposure at an individual 
level will be the use of Mn/Fe ratio (M IR) in plasma or red blood cells. This method was 
established on the notion that manganese exposure can alter iron homeostasis.  
A  non-invasive m ethod will be the use of m agnetic resonance imag ing (MRI), in 
com bination with (-aminobutyric acid (GA BA) by magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS). 
This method is able to quantify m anganese accumu lation in the brain based on the images, and 
detect manganese exposure, even without any clinical symptoms  of manganese intoxication. 
Finally, an emerging method is the use of X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy or neutron- 
based spectroscopy. This method is able to detect low levels of a variety of metals (Nie et al., 
2006). 
How ever, since man ganese is excreted via bile, potential toxicity is likely to occur in 
neonate and individuals with liver disease (Hauser et al., 199 4). In addition, due to the 
bioavailability of manganese which may be more in drinking water and supplements than food, 
extra caution should be considered. 
The U L levels for manganese was based on the IOM Recommenda tions (2006). The UL 
level for adults above 19 years old for manganese is 11mg/day and Table 28.2 shows the UL 
levels by age group. 
486 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
M anga nese 
Table 28.2. Tolerable upper intake (UL) levels by age group for manganes e 
Age group Tolerable upper intake (UL) mg/day 
Infants 0 - 12 months Unable to establish 
Children 1 - 3 years 2
4 - 8 years 3
9 - 13 years 6
Adolescents 14 - 18 years 9
Pregnancy 14 - 18 years 9
19 - 50 years 11 
Lactation 14 - 18 years 9
19 - 50 years 11 
Source: IOM (2006) 
487 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
M anga nese 
28.9  R esearch Recomm endations 
The following are three areas for research recomme ndations: 
• There is no data on the manganese status in the Ma laysian population, whe ther we  are 
consum ing enough manganese from our diet, or reports of manganese deficiency. 
• The M alaysian Food Comp osition do not have data on the m anganese content of 
M alaysian foods and its inclusion is recomme nded. 
• There are some reports which showed potential roles of manganese in the prevention of 
the following chronic diseases/conditions: brain disorders; diabetes mellitus; lipid 
disturbances; and some cancers so further investigations in this area are needed. 
488 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
M anga nese 
28.10 References 
Ag ency for Toxic Substances and Diseases Registry (ATSDR), US De partment of Health and 
Hum an Services (2012). Toxicological profile for manganese, 556 pp. 
Az rina A , Khoo HE, Idris MA, Amin I & Razman MR (2011). M ajor inorganic elements in tap 
water samples in Peninsular Malaysia. Mal J Nutr 17(2): 271-6. 
Baly DL, Keen CL & Hurley LS (1985). Pyruvate carboxylase and phosphoenolpyruvate 
carboxykinase activity in developing rats: effect of m anganese deficiency. J Nutr 
Jul; 115(7):872-9. 
Cantala A (2012). Biochemistry, Genetics and Molecular Biology. Lipid Peroxidation. 2012. From 
http://ww w.intechopen.com /books/lipid-peroxidation/region-specific-vulnerability-to- 
lipid-peroxidation-in-the-human-central-nervous-system [Retrieved June 28 2016]. 
D avis CD &  Greger JL (1992). Longitudinal changes of manganese-dependent superoxide 
dismutase and other indexes of manganes e and iron status in women. Am J Clin Nu tr 
55(3):747-752. 
Eu ropean Food Safety Authority (2013). Scientific Opinion on D ietary Reference Values for 
manganese. EFSA Journal 11 (11): 3419. 
Gr eger JL (1999). Nutrition versus toxicology of manganese in humans: evaluation of potential 
biomarkers. Neutotoxicology 20: 205-212. 
Gr eger JL, Davis CD, Suttie JW & Lyle BJ (1990). Intake, serum concentrations, and urinary 
excretion of manganese by adult males. A m J Clin Nutr 51 (3):457-461. 
Finley JW, Johnson PE & Johnson LK (1994). Sex affects manganese absorption and retention 
by humans from a diet adequate in manganese. Am J Clin Nutr 60 (6):949-955. 
Freeland-G raves J, Behm ardi F, Bales CW, Dougherty V, Lin PH, Crosby JB & Trickett PC (198 8). 
Met abolic balance of ma nganese in young wome n consuming diets containing five levels 
of dietary manganese. J Nutr 118 (6):764-773. 
Friedman BJ, Freeland-Graves JH, Bales CW, Behmardi F, Shorey-Kutschke RL, Willis RA , 
Crosby JB, Trickett PC & H ouston SD (19 87 ). Manganese balance and clinical 
observations in young men fed a manganese-deficient diet. J Nutr 117 (1):133-143. 
Hauser RA, Zesiewicz TA, Rosemurgy AS, Martinez C & Olanow CW (1994). Manganese 
intoxication and chronic liver failure. Ann N eurol 36 (6):871-875. 
Institute of Medicine (IOM) (U S) Panel of Micronutrients (2001). Dietary Reference Intakes for 
Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Ars enic, Boron, Ch romium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, 
Molybdenum , Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and Zinc. Washington (DC): National Academies 
Press (US). 
489 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
M anga nese 
Institute of Medicine (IOM) (U S) Panel of Micronutrients (2006). Dietary Reference Intakes for 
Vitamin A, Vitam in K, Ar senic, Boron, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Mang anese, 
M olybdenum, N ickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and Zinc. Washington (DC ): National Academ ies 
Press (US). 
Nie H, Chettle DR, Luo LQ & O’Me ara JM (2006). In-vivo investigation of a new 109Cd gamma- 
ray induced K-XRF bone lead measurement systems. Phys Med Biol 51 (2):351-60. 
Penland JG & Johnson PE (1993). Dietary calcium and m anganese effects on me nstrual cycle 
sym ptoms. Am J Obstet Gynecol 168:1417-23. 
Royal S ociety of Chemistry (2017). Manganese. From  http://www .rsc.org/periodic- 
table/element/25/manganese [Retrieved from: March 16 2017]. 
Schroeder HA, Balassa JJ &  Tipton IH (1966). Ess ential trace metals in man: ma nganese. A 
study in homeostasis. J Chronic Dis 19 (5):545-71. 
Scientific Commi ttee for Food (SCF) (199 3). Nutrient and energy intakes for the European 
Commun ity. Reports of the Scientific Committee for Food, 31st Series. Food - Science 
and Technique, European Commission, Luxembourg, 248 pp. 
The Linus Pauling Institute’s Micronutrient Inform ation Center (MIC) (2010). Manganese. From 
http://lpi.oregonstate.edu/mic/minerals/manganese [Retrieved August 26 2016]. 
U S Depa rtm ent of Agriculture, Agriculture Research Service, Nutrient Data Laboratory. (2005) 
U SDA Nat ional Nutrient D atabase for Standard Reference, Release 28. Version Current: 
September 2015, slightly revised May 2016. Internet:/nea/bhnrc/ndl 
Zheng W, Fu SX, D ydak U, & Cowan DM (2011). Biomarkers of man ganese intoxication. 
N eurotoxicology 21(1): 1-8. 
Zoni S & Lucchini RG (2013). Manganese exposure: cognitive, motor and behavioural effects 
on children: a review of recent findings. Cu rr Opin Pediatr 25(2): 255-260. 
490 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
M anga nese 
Age group AI (m g/day) Age group AI (m g/day) 
M alaysia (201 7) 
Age group AI (m g/day) 
IO M  (2006 ) EFSA (201 3) 
Appendix 28.1  Com parison of recom m ended intake for M anganese: R N I M alaysia (201 7), AI & R N I of IO M  (2006 ) and AI& R N I of EFSA (201 3) 
Infants Infants Infants 
0 - 6 m onths         0.003 0 - 6 m onths            0.003 0 - 6 m onths               -
7 -12 m onths              0.6 7 - 12 m onths             0.6 7 -11 m onths        0.02 - 0.5 
R N I (m g/day) R N I (m g/day) R N I (m g/day) 
Children Children Children 
1 - 3 years 1.2 1 - 3 years                 1.2 1 - 3 years                 0.5 
4 - 8  years 1.5 4 - 8  years                 1.5 4 - 6 years                 1.0 
7- 10 years                1.5 
Boys Boys Boys 
9  - 13 years 1.9 9  - 13 years                 1.9 11 - 14 years               2.0 
14 -18  years 2.2 14 -18  years              2.2 15 - 17 years              3.0 
G irls G irls G irls 
9  - 13 years 1.6 9  - 13 years                 1.6 11 - 14 years               2.0 
14 - 18  years 1.6 14 -18  years              1.6 15 - 17 years              3.0 
491 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
M anga nese 
Age group AI (m g/day) Age group AI (m g/day) 
M alaysia (201 7) 
Age group AI (m g/day) 
IO M  (2006 ) EFSA (201 3) 
M en M en M en 
19  - 30 years                2.3 19  - 30 years               2.3 ≥18  years                  3.0 
31 - 50 years                2.3 31 - 50 years               2.3 
50 - 70 years                2.3 50 - 70 years               2.3 
>70 years                   2.3 >70 years                  2.3 
W om en W om en W om en 
19  - 30 years                1.8 19  - 30 years               1.8 ≥18  years                  3.0 
31 - 50 years                1.8 31 - 50 years               1.8 
50 - 70 years                1.8    50 - 70 years               1.8 
>70 years                   1.8        >70 years                  1.8 
Pregnancy Pregnancy Pregnancy 
14 - 18  years old          2.0 14 - 18  years old         2.0 3.0 
19  - 50 years old          2.0 19  - 50 years old         2.0 
Lactation Lactation Lactation 
14 - 18  years old          2.6 14 - 18  years old        2.6 3.0 
19  - 50 years old          2.6 19  - 50 years old        2.6 
492 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
29 • Molybdenum 
29.1 Introduction 
Molyb denum is a metallic element with the atomic symbol Mo.  Molybdenum is a hard, 
high-melting high-density dark gray metal or black powder. Practically insoluble in alkali 
hydroxides and insoluble in water, molybdenum is used to make  structural alloys and as a 
catalyst.  
In huma ns, molybdenum  is an essential trace elemen t, being a cofactor of a limited 
numb er of key enzym es involved in the catabolism of sulphur am ino acids and heterocyclic 
compounds, including purines and pyridines (Brychkova et al., 2015).  
Most of the body’s molybdenum  is stored in the liver, bones, glands and kidneys. It is 
also found in the skin, mus cles, spleen and lungs. While the body is usually able to absorb 
m ore molybdenum than it needs, the majority of what is absorbed is released as waste in urine. 
29.2 Functions 
As a dietary trace element, molybdenum is known  to function as a cofactor for the 
following important enzymes: 
1. Sulphite oxidase (SO) is crucial for degradation of sulfur-containing compou nds in 
anima ls and plants. In the metabolism of sulphur amino acids (methionine and cysteine), 
sulphite oxidase catalyses the transform ation of sulphite to sulphate. Sulphite is present 
in man y chemically preserved foods and specific food proteins, and is a toxic nucleophile, 
the level of which must be carefully controlled. Thus, the action of sulphite oxidase helps 
to reduce toxic build-up of sulphites. 
2. Xanthine oxidase (XO) catalyses the breakdown of nucleotides (precursors to DNA and 
RNA ) to form uric acid. Uric acid is a final enzyma tic product in the degradation of purine 
nucleosides and free bases in humans, and is known to be a major antioxidant in the 
human plasma. On the other hand, a strong association has been demons trated between 
high levels of serum uric acid and the developm ent of hypertension, diabetes type II, 
kidney disease, cardiovascular disease, me tabolic syndrome  and its compone nts (Sautin 
& Johnson, 2008; Nejatinamini et al., 2015). 
3. A ldehyde oxidase (AO ) is a xanthine oxidase (XO)-related enzym e with em erging 
importance due to its role in the metabolism of drugs. It has been increasingly recognized 
in this past decade that AO , through its unique structure, distribution, and substrate 
recognition, has an important role to play in the metabolism of drugs (Pryde et al., 2010). 
In addition to the oxidation of aldehydes to carboxylic acids, AOX is also responsible for 
the metabolism of new chemical entities em erging from m odern drug discovery 
programm es, primarily through nitrogen-containing heterocycle oxidation including 
pyridines and purines and a wide variety of other fused heteroaromatic systems. 
4. M itoochondrial amidoxime reducing component (mARC) is the newly discovered fourth 
molybdenum  enzyme in mamm als.  While its precise function is under investigation, 
initial studies showed that mA RC forms a three-component enzyme system  with 
493 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Mo lybd enum 
cytochrome b5 and NADH  cytochrome b5 reductase. This mARC’s N-reductive enzyme 
system plays a a major role in drug metabolism, especially in the activation of so-called 
“amidoxime-prodrugs” and in the detoxification of N-hydroxylated xenobiotics, though 
its physiological relevance is largely unknown (Plitzko et al,  2013). 
29.3 M etabolism 
Besides being a cofactor of key enzymes, molybdenum also plays a role in the excretion 
of excess acetaldehydes in the body. Yeast (candida) feeds on sugars in the intestine and 
continuously releases by-products, most impo rtant of which is acetaldehyde. Detrimental effects 
attributed to acetaldehyde include damage s to the memb ranes of red blood cells, and it can 
negatively affect the respiratory, immune and endocrine systems. A buildup can lead to muscle 
aches, an overall sensation of weakness, and joint pain. Those who drink alcohol excessively 
often experience increased levels of acetaldehyde in their bodies. Molybdenum is able to convert 
acetaldehyde into acetic acid, which is easily excreted, or alternatively, acetic acid is converted 
into acetyl coenzyme A, which is an essential part of the body’s metabolism. 
The biosynthesis of m olybdenum  cofactor involves the com plex interaction of six 
proteins and is a process of four steps, which also require iron, ATP , and copper. Mutations in 
the mo lybdenum cofactor biosynthetic pathway lead to the com bined deficiency of all 
m olybdenum-dependent enzymes.  
N utrient-nutrient interactions 
Mo lybdenum- copper 
E xcess molybdenum  intake causes fatal copper deficiency diseases in ruminant animals. 
The interaction of m olybdenum  with high sulfide generation in the rum en results in the 
form ation of thiomolybdates. Thiomolybdate w ith four sulfur atoms called tetrathiomolybdate 
is a molecule that can form high-affinity complexes with copper, preventing the absorption of 
copper and blocking the activity of copper-dependent enzyme s (Suttle, 2012). 
How ever, there is a lack of evidence in humans ingesting enough dietary molybdenum 
to cause depletion of copper. Hence, the National Academy  of Sciences did not consider this 
copper interaction to be relevant for humans  in their determination of a Tolerable Upper Intake 
Limit (U L) for molybdenum. 
Interestingly, thiomolybdate’s ability to lower free copper levels is taken advantage in the 
treatme nt of Wilson’s disease, a genetic disorder characterised by copper accumu lation in 
tissues responsible for hepatic and neurologic disorders. Tetrathiomolybdate therapy (TM) 
seem s able to prevent neurologic deterioration in patients (Brewer et al., 2009). 
494 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Mo lybd enum 
Mo lybdenum- iron 
Adequate iron status is essential to ensure proper molybdenum utilization. All enzyme s 
that use molybdenum as a cofactor require iron in the forma tion of these enzyme s. Additionally, 
the sulfite oxidase enzym es use iron in the form of heme (the sam e iron-containing protein 
found in red blood cells) along with molybdenum in their detoxification activity. 
29.4 Sources 
Legum es, such as beans, lentils, and peas, are the richest sources of molybdenum. Grain 
products and nuts are considered good sources, while animal products, fruit, and m any 
vegetables are generally low in molybdenum . The molybdenum content of plants depends on 
the soil molybdenum content and other environmental conditions in which the plant is grown 
and m ay differ considerably. Traces of molybdenum are also found in natural wa ter sources 
(Table 29.1). 
Molyb denum is stored in the body, particularly in the liver, kidneys, glands, and bones. 
It is also found in the lungs, spleen, skin, and muscles. Molybdenum  is absorbed very efficiently 
over a wide range of intakes by passive transport and urinary excretion reflects intake (Turnlund, 
Keyes, Peiffer, 1995). About 90% of the molybdenum eaten in foods is eliminated by the body 
through the urine 
Table 29.1: M olybdenum  content of foods 
Food sources µg/100 g fresh weight 
O ats (rolled) 115.4 
Soybeans (cooked) 75 
Black beans (cooked) 75 
Lentils 74.3 
Kidney beans 73.8 
Barley 41.5 
Eggs 17 
Carrots 4.8 
Tom atoes 4.5 
Cucumber 2.3 
Source: www.whfoods.org (2017) 
495 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Mo lybd enum 
29.5 D eficiency 
Since only a very small amount of molybdenum is required, deficiency is very rare unless 
due to genetic disorders.  Xanthinuria is a rare genetic defect with excess urinary excretion of 
xanthine. There are two inherited form s of xanthinuria. Type I xanthinuria caused by a deficiency 
of xanthine dehydrogenase, while Type II xanthinuria is characterised by a deficiency of xanthine 
dehydrogenase, aldehyde oxidase in addition to xanthine oxidase. Plasma  accumulation and 
excess urinary excretion of the highly insoluble xanthine may lead to arthropathy (a collective 
term for any disease of the joints), myopathy, crystal nephropathy, urolithiasis (formation of 
stony concretions in the urinary system), or renal failure. 
M olybdenum cofactor deficiency is a rare inborn error of me tabolism that is estim ated 
to occur in 1 in 100,000 to 200,000 new-borns worldwide. It is thought that the condition is 
underdiagnosed, so the number of affected individuals may be higher (Bayram et al., 2013). The 
m ajor clinical symptoms are intractable neonatal seizures, progressive encephalopathy, facial 
dysm orphic features and feeding difficulties. Molybdenum cofactor deficiency Type A is due to 
m utations in the molybdenum cofactor synthesis 1 (MOCS 1) gene, while Type B deficiency is 
caused by mutations in MOCS2 . Both Type A and Type B deficiencies result in the loss of sulfite 
oxidase activity, also observed in isolated sulfite oxidase deficiency and characterized by severe 
neurologic abnormalities in affected patients (Mendel, 2013). 
In the genetic disorder that prevents sulphite oxidase synthesis, sulphite is not oxidised 
to sulphate, resulting in severe neurological dama ge and early death. Patients with Crohn’s 
D isease (inflammatory bowel disorder) are know n to excrete excess molybdenum leading to 
m olybdenum  deficiency. Crohn’s D isease is believed to be implicated by both genetic and 
environmental factors. 
29.6 Factors affecting Molybdenum requirements 
The gastrointestinal tract readily absorbs soluble, but not insoluble, mo lybdenum 
com pounds. Absorption rate of m olybdenum  from  the diet of both patients and healthy 
volunteers averaged about 50% in one study and 88-93% in another study in which the patients 
received 22-1490µgm Mo/day for 24 days (Wester, 1971).  
Studies on molybdenum  bio-kinetics in humans using the radionuclide 99Mo provided 
the following conclusions (Giussani et al., 1998) : 
• Intestinal absorption of molybdenum  supplied as an aqueous solution is almost complete 
(>90%, Mo < 5 mg). 
• Intestinal absorption of molybdenum  supplied with a solid mea l is less than 50% of the 
adm inistered amount. 
• U rinary excretion regulates rapidly the body content of molybdenum and its pattern is 
independent of the administered form (injection or ingestion, extrinsic or intrinsic tracer). 
496 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Mo lybd enum 
• The excreted amount rises strongly with increasing molybdenum dietary level. 
• Gas tric emptying is much slow er with solid meals than w ith aqueous solutions of 
molybdenum: residence half-times for solids 30 minutes, for liquids 10 minutes.  
29.7 Setting requireme nts and recomm ended intake of molybdenum 
The primary criterion used to set an E stim ated Average Requiremen t (EAR ) is 
molybdenum balance in controlled studies with specific amounts of molybdenum consumed. 
Adjustments are made for the bioavailability of molybdenum  and criteria for determining 
Molybdenum requirement is shown in Table 29.2.  
Table 29.2: Criteria for determining molybdenum requirements, by life stage group. 
Life stage group Criterion 
0 through 6 months Average molybdenum intake from human milk 
7 through 12 months Extrapolation from 0 through 6 months AI 
1 through 18 years Extrapolation from adult EAR 
19 through 30 years Balance data 
31 through > 70 years Extrapolation of balance data from 19 through 30 years 
Pregnancy 
≤ 18 years Extrapolation of adolescent female EAR  based on body weight 
19 through 50 years Extrapolation of adult female EAR based on body weight 
Lactation 
≤ 18 years Adolescent female EAR plus average amount of molybdenum 
secreted in human milk 
19 through 50 years Adult female EAR plus average amount of molybdenum secreted 
in human milk 
Source: IOM (2006) 
497 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Mo lybd enum 
The Euro pean Food Safety Authority (EFSA) in 2013 proposed adequate intake (AI) level 
for molybdenum as part of its effort to provide dietary reference values (D RVs) for 
m icronutrients. The EFSA’s Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies (NDA Panel) after 
a public consultation, proposed AI for molybdenum as 65 microgram s per day for all adults and 
10-65 micrograms per day for infants, children and adolescents. 
The TS C on Minerals and Trace Elements decided on adoption of the IOM (2006) values 
for the 2017 RNIs. 
R ecomm ended intakes by age groups 
AI of molybdenum for infants: 
0 - 6 m onths 2 µg/day 
7 - 12 months 3 µg/day. 
Information on dietary intake of molybdenum  is lim ited because of lack of a simple and 
reliable analytical method for determining molybdenum in foods (IOM, 2006).  For children and 
adolescents, a RNI has been set for both male and female: 
1 - 3 years 17 µg/day 
4 - 8 years 22 µg/day 
9 - 13 years 34 µg/day 
14 - 18 y ears 43 µg /day 
It is estim ated that a typical US adult’s diet supplies 120 µg/day to 210 µg/day.  For men 
and women above 19 years and pregnancy and lactation (14-50 years), the RNI are: 
Adults Ages ≥1 9 years 
M en and w omen ≥19 years 45 µg/day 
Pregnancy and Lactation 
14 - 50 y ears 50 µg/day 
29.8 Tolerable upper intake levels 
There is little cause for concern about excessive dietary intake of toxic levels of 
m olybdenum  in foods, except in s ituations involving en vironm ental contamination. 
M olybdenosis is a rare disorder caused by excessive consumption of molybdenum supplement 
w ith symptoms o f impairment of growth in children, diarrhoea and anaem ia. At extreme 
am ounts in animal studies, molybdenum  can cause stunted growth, kidney damage , bone loss, 
anem ia, and infertility. None of these potential problems has been observed in humans, as it is 
498 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Mo lybd enum 
practically impossible to consum e such high levels of molybdenum from food, unless there is 
industrial contam ination of the environment, and humans living in the area consum e the 
contaminated plants and animals.  
The National Academy of Sciences (NAS)  has established a Tolerable Upper Intake Level 
(UL) of 2 mg for adult men and women 19 years and older. For younger persons, the ULs are 
as follows. 
• 1-3 years: 0.6 mg (600 µg) 
• 9-13 years: 1.1 mg (1,100 µg) 
• 14-19 years: 1.7 mg (1,700 µg) 
• 19+ years: 2.0 mg (2,000 µg) 
• Pregnant or lactating women, under 19 years: 1.7 mg (1,700 µg) 
• Pregnant or lactating women, over 19 years: 2.0 mg (2,000 µg) 
29.9 Research recommendat ions 
The mos t recently discovered molybdenum-containing enzyme in m am m als. 
“m itochondrial amidoxime reducing component” (mARC) has been found to be capable of 
reducing a great variety of N-hydroxylated substrates, in the activation of prodrugs containing 
an amidoxime structure, and in detoxification pathways, e.g., of N-hydroxylated purine and 
pyrimidine bases. However, its physiological relevance is largely unknown (Ott, Havem eyer, 
Clement, 2015). 
There continues to be research into examining the roles of molybdenum in various forms 
of cancer and cancer prevention. 
Controversy prevails about uric acid, gout and other inflam m atory diseases, which 
feature high uric acid. These may include: heart disease, arthritis, kidney disease, diabetes, 
autoimmu ne conditions, and GI inflam mation. When uric acid precipitates into tissues, this can 
lead to the aggravation of gouty arthritis.  Very high levels of molybdenum in the diet such as 
10mg to 15 mg/day, and industrial exposure to molybdenum might cause gout. More studies 
are suggested to clarify the roles dietary molybdenum, sulfur, iron and copper in uric acid 
biosynthesis.  
As  molybdenum is found in tooth enamel, many believe that healthy molybdenum levels 
help prevent the formation of cavities and even some  other gum disorders. Studies are proposed 
to elucidate the roles of molybdenum in gum health. 
499 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Mo lybd enum 
29.10 R eferences 
Bayram E, Topcu Y, Karakaya P , Yis U, Cakma kci H, Ichida K, Kurul SH (2013). Molybdenum 
cofactor deficiency: review of 12 cases (MoCD  and review). Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 17(1): 
1-6. 
Brewe r GJ, Askari F, Di ck RB, Sitterly J, Fink JK, Carlson M , Kluin KJ, Lorincz M T (2009). 
Treatment of Wilson’s disease with tetrathiomolybdate: V. control of free copper by 
tetrathiomolybdate and a comparison with trientine. Transl Res. 154(2): 70-77 
Brychkova G, Yarmolinsky D , Batushansky A, Grishkevich V, Khozin-Goldbe rg I, Fait A, Amir R, 
Fluhr R, Sagi M. (2015). Sulfite O xidase Activity Is Essential for Norm al Sulfur, Nitrogen 
and Carbon Metabolism in Tomato Leaves. Plants 4, 573-605. 
G iussani, A, Cantone, MC, deBartolo D, Roth P , Wern er E  (1998 ). A revised model of 
m olybdenum biokinetics in humans for application in radiation protection, Hlth Physics 
75: 479-486. 
Institute of Medicine (IOM) (2006). Dietary Reference Intakes: The Essential G uide to Nutrient 
R equirem ents. J. J. Otten, J. P . Hellwig and L. D. Meyers. Wa shington, D.C, N ational 
A cademy of Sciences 
M endel RR (2013).  The molybdenum cofactor. J Biol Chem . 10; 288(19):13165-72 
N ejatinamini S, Ataie-Jafari A, Qorbani M, Nikoohem at S, Kelishadi R, Asayesh H, Hosseini S. 
(2015). Association between serum uric acid level and metabolic syndrom e com ponents. 
J Diabetes Metabolic Disorders 14:70 
O tt G, Havem eyer A, Clemen t B (2015).  The mam malian molybdenum enzymes of mARC. J Biol 
Inorg Chem. 20(2): 265-75. 
Plitzko B, Ott G, Reichmann D, CJ Henderson, CR Wo lf, R M endel, F Bittner, B Clement, A 
Haveme yer  (2013).  The Involveme nt of M itochondrial Am idoxime Reducing 
Component s 1 and 2 and Mitochondrial Cytochrome b5 in N-reductive Me tabolism in 
Hum an Cells. J Biol Chem. 288(28): 20228-20237. 
Pryde DC, Dalvie D, Hu Q, Jones P , Obach RS, Tran T (2010).  Aldehyde Oxidase: An Enzyme 
of Emerging Importance in Drug Discovery. J. Med. Chem. 53: 8441-8460 
Suttle NF  (2012). Copper imbalances in ruminants and humans: unexpected common ground. 
A dv Nutr. 3(5): 666-674 
Turnlund JR, Keyes WR, Peiffer GL (1995). Molybdenum absorption, excretion and retention 
studied with stable isotopes in young men at five intakes of dietary molybdenum. Am J 
Clin Nutr 62: 790-6. 
500 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Mo lybd enum 
Wester, PO (1971).  Trace element balances in two cases of pancreatic insufficiency. Acta Med. 
Scand. 190: 155-161. 
ww w .whfoods.org. (Accessed Jan 15 2017). 
Yuri Y. Sautin and Richard J (2008). Johnson Uric acid: the oxidant-antioxidant paradox. 
Nu cleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids. 27(6): 608-619 
501 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Mo lybd enum 
Appendix 29.1: Comparison of recommended i ntake for Molybdenum RNI Malays ia (2017) and AI 
of IOM  (2006) 
RNI Malaysia (2017) 
Age group AI (µg/day) Age group AI (µg/day) 
IOM  (2006) 
Infants Infants 
0 - 6 months              2 0 - 6 months              2
7 -12 months             3 7 - 12 months             3
Children Children 
1 - 3 years                  17 1 - 3 years                 17 
4 - 8 years                 22 4 - 8 years                22 
Boys Boys 
9 - 13 years                  34 9 - 13 years                 34 
14 -18 years               43 14 -18 years              43 
G irls Girls 
9 - 13 years                 34 9 - 13 years                 34 
14 - 18 years               43 14 - 18 years              43 
M en M en 
19 - 30 years                45 19 - 30 years               45 
31 - 50 years                45 31 - 50 years               45 
50 - 70 years                45 50 - 70 years              45 
>70 years                   45 >70 years                  45 
W omen Wome n 
19 - 30 years                45 19 - 30 years              45 
31 - 50 years                45 31 - 50 years               45 
50 - 70 years                45   50 - 70 years               45 
>70 years                   45 >70 years                  45      
Pregnancy Pregnancy 
14 - 18 years old          50 14 - 18 years old         50 
19 - 50 years old          50 19 - 50 years old         50 
Lactation Lactation 
14 - 18 years old          50 14 - 18 years old         50 
19 - 50 years old          50 19 - 50 years old         50 
502 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
30 • Flouride 
30.1 Introduction 
Fluorine was discovered as an element in the early 1500s by the Germ an physician 
Geor gius Agricola. The element was isolated in its pure form by Henri Moiss an in late 1800s. 
Fluorine occurs naturally as the negatively charged ion, (F-). Fluoride is found throughout the 
earth’s crust and occurs naturally in all water sources and some foods. 
In the 1930s, researchers found that people who grew  up drinking naturally fluoridated 
water had up to two-thirds fewer cavities than people living in areas without fluoridated water. 
Studies since then have repeatedly show n that in the right amount, fluoride provides significant 
protection against tooth decay and dental cavities. Subsequently, the Am erican De ntal 
Ass ociation, the Wo rld Health Organization and the American Medical Association, among m any 
other organizations, have endorsed the addition of fluoride in drinking water supplies. 
30.2 Functions 
Fluorine is present in almos t all tissue, especially the teeth and bones. Ingested fluorides 
are comp letely ionized and absorbed in the stomach and intestines. Fluoride is rapidly excreted 
in the urine. 
Fluoride rapidly enters the mineralized tissue, mainly bones and developing teeth. About 
95% of the total body fluoride is stored in bones and teeth, wh ere fluoride reacts with 
hydroxyapatite in the bones and teeth to form fluoroapatite. Fluoride’s high chemical reactivity 
and small radius allow it to either displace the larger hydroxyl (-OH) ion in the hydroxyapatite 
crystal, forming fluoroapatite, or to increase crystal density by entering spaces within the 
hydroxyapatite crystal. (Cerklewski, 1998).  
Fluoride helps prevent cavities in two different ways: 
• Fluoride concentrates in the growing bones and developing teeth of children, helping to 
harden the enamel on child and adult teeth before they emerge 
• Fluoride helps to maintain the hardened enamel on adult teeth.  
Fluoride works during the demineralization and remineralisation processes that naturally 
occur in the mout h. Acids in the saliva cause demineralization, dissolving of the calcium and 
phosphorous under the tooth’s surface. At other times, one’s saliva is less acidic, it does just 
the opposite, replenishing the calcium and phosphorous that keep teeth hard. This process is 
caused remineralisation. Fluoride present during remineralisation, calcium and phosphorus 
deposited are harder than they would otherwise be, helping to strengthen teeth and prevent 
dissolution during the next demineralisation phase. 
Fluoride is considered a trace element because only small amounts are present in the 
body (about 2.6 grams in adults). The daily requirement for maintaining dental health is only a 
few milligrams a day. Although its role in the prevention of dental caries is well established, 
fluoride is not generally considered an essential mineral element because hum ans do not require 
it for grow th or to sustain life. 
503 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Flouride 
30.3 M etabolism 
Fluorine is present in almost all tissues especially the teeth and bones. Ingested fluorides 
are comp letely ionized and absorbed in the stomach and intestines. Fluoride is rapidly excreted 
in the urine. 
Both calcium  and magnesium form insoluble complexes with fluoride and are capable of 
significantly decreasing fluoride absorption when present in the same meal. However, the 
absorption of fluoride in the form  of monofluorophosphate is unaffected by calcium. Also, a diet 
low in chloride (salt) has been found to increase fluoride retention by reducing urinary excretion 
of fluoride (Cerklewski, 1997). 
A luminum -containing antacids can decrease the absorption of fluoride. It is best to take 
these products two hours before or after fluoride supplements. The use of small am ounts of 
aluminium-containing antacids increases faecal fluoride significantly, thereby decreasing the 
intestinal absorption of fluoride. The dual effects of aluminium, namely in causing calcium loss 
and inhibition of the intestinal absorption of fluoride, can result in adverse effects on bone 
w hich may contribute to bone loss. 
30.4 D eficiency 
In hum ans, the only clear effect of inadequate fluoride intake is an increased risk of dental 
caries for individuals of all ages. Epidemiological investigations of patterns of water 
consum ption and the prevalence of dental caries across various regions in United States with 
different water fluoride concentrations led to the developm ent of a recomm ended optimum 
range of fluoride concentration of 0.7-1.2 milligrams/liter (mg/L) or parts per million (ppm); the 
lowe r concentration was recom mended for warmer climates where water consum ption is higher, 
and the higher concentration was recommended for colder climates. 
This recommendati on was revised recently “all com munity water systems to adjust the 
fluoride concentration to 0.7 mg/L as recent data do not show a convincing relationship between 
fluid intake and ambient air temperature, and to reduce the risk of dental fluorosis and in light 
of the widespread availability of fluoride from other sources, including fluoride-containing oral- 
care products” (Department of Health and Human Services, 2015). 
In Malaysia, the level of 0.7 ppm (parts per million) was recommen ded in 197 1 by a 
special com mittee of inquiry appointed to report upon the fluoridation of public water supply. 
In 1972, the government gave approval for nationwide implementation of the fluoridation 
programm e  Presently an estimated 76% of the Ma laysian population benefit from fluoridated 
w ater (MOH, 2011). 
A n analysis of drinking water in nine areas in Malaysia reported that water fluoride  levels 
varied from  0.71 +/-0.12 mg/L in Seri Serdang, Selangor to 0.08 +/- 0.06 mg/L in Sabah, where 
w ater fluoridation was stopped in 1989 (Shaharuddin et al., 2010).  
504 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Flouride 
30.5 Sources 
The major source of dietary fluoride globally is drinking water through controlled addition 
of fluoride to water used by commu nities as a public health measu re to adjust fluoride 
concentration. An adult male residing in a com munity with fluoridated water has an intake range 
from 1-3 mg/day. Intake is less than 1 mg/day in non-fluoridated areas. 
The fluoride content of most foods is low (less than 0.05 mg/100 grams  or 0.5 ppm). 
Rich sources of fluoride include tea, which concentrates fluoride in its leaves, and marine fish 
that are consumed with their bones (e.g., sardines). Foods made with mechanically separated 
(boned) chicken, such as canned me ats, hot dogs, and infant foods, also add fluoride to the diet. 
In addition, certain fruit juices, particularly grape juices, often have relatively high fluoride 
concentrations. Foods generally contribute only 0.3-0.6 mg of the daily intake of fluoride. 
In Malaysia, Zubaidah et al. (2014) reported the mean fluoride contents in packet and 
hawkers’ drinks, at 7.64±1.88 mg/L and 7.51±1.60 mg/L respectively, and in bottled drinking 
water (1.05±0.35 mg/L).  Tea packet drinks were found to contain the highest mean amount of 
fluoride (13.02±0.23 mg/L). 
Drinking water in the US  has an optimal level of 0.7 to 1.2 milligram s (mg) per liter, 
which corresponds to 0.7-1.2 ppm. This concentration range has been found to decrease the 
incidence of dental caries while minimizing the risk of dental fluorosis and other adverse effects. 
The US D epartment of Health and Human Services in 2015 has recomme nded that the optimal 
concentration in drinking water be set at 0.7 ppm. 
Water fluoridation 
The common types of fluoride additives used in water fluoridation are: 
Fluorosilicic acid: a w ater-based solution used by mo st water systems in the United 
States. Fluorosilicic acid is also referred to as hydrofluorosilicate, FSA, or HFS. 
So dium fluorosilicate: a dry additive, dissolved into a solution before being added to 
water. 
Sodium fluoride: a dry additive, typically used in small wa ter systems, dissolved into a 
solution before being added to water 
(http://ww w.cdc.gov/fluoridation/factsheets/engineering/wfadditives.htm). 
Most fluoride additives used in the United States are produced from phosphorite rock. 
Phosphorite contains calcium phosphate mixed with limestone (calcium carbonates) minerals 
and apatite-a mineral with high phosphate and fluoride content. It is refluxed (heated) with 
sulfuric acid, releasing hydrogen fluoride (HF) and silicon tetrafluoride (SiF4) gases, which are 
condensed to a water-based solution of approximately 23% FSA. Approximately 95% of FSA 
used for water fluoridation comes from this process. 
505 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Flouride 
All additives used by water treatme nt plants, including fluoride additives, mus t meet 
strict quality standards that assure the public’s safety. In U nited States, these additives are 
subject to a stringent system of standards, testing, and certificates by the National Sanitation 
Foundation/Ameri can N ational Standards Institute (NSF/ANS I). The NSF International is a not- 
for-profit standards development and conformity assessme nt organization. Products used for 
drinking water treatment are evaluated to the criteria specified in NSF/ANSI Standard 60. This 
standard was developed by an NSF International-led consortium, including the American Water 
Wor ks Association (AWWA) (http://www.cdc.gov/fluoridation). 
N SF/AN SI Standard 60 requires, when available, that the U.S. Environme ntal Protection 
A gency (EPA) Maximum Contam inant Level (MC L) be used to determine the acceptable level 
for a chemical of interest. The EPA  M CL for fluoride ion in water is 4 mg/L. The allowable 
m aximum use levels (MUL) for NSF 60 Certified fluoridation products are: 
• Fluorosilicic Acid: 6 mg/L 
• So dium Fluorosilicate: 2 mg/L 
• So dium Fluoride: 2.3 mg/L 
Studies suggest that human exposure to fluorosilicates due to the use of hexafluorosilicic 
acid or hexafluorosilicate for drinking water fluoridation, if any, is very low as fluorosilicates in 
w ater are rapidly hydrolyzed to fluoride (Finney et al. 2006). 
Whi le water softeners are not thought to change water fluoride levels, reverse osmos is 
system s, distillation units, and some w ater filters have been found to remove significant 
am ounts of fluoride from water. 
Bottled water sales have grown exponentially and studies have found that most bottled 
w aters contain sub-optimal levels of fluoride, although there is considerable variation (Cutrufelli 
et al., 2005). 
Table 30.1 shows examples of countries with a varying extent of flouridation of drinking 
w ater supplies.There are also geographical variations within som e countries in terms of 
availability of fluoridated water at home.  In Malaysia, it is estimated about 76% of the population 
or alm ost 21 million received fluoridated water in 2011, which is an increase from about 5 
m illion in 2003 (MOH, 2011).  
506 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Flouride 
Table 30.1.  Water fluoridation (artificial and natural) in selected countries. 
Num ber of people supplied with 
fluoridated water (millions) 
Percentage of population supplied 
with optim ally fluoridated water 
Singapore 5.1 100 
Vietnam 7 100 
A ustralia 17.7 80 
M alaysia 20.7 76 
U nited States 204.3 74 
N ew Zealand 2.3 61 
Canada 14.6 44 
Brazil 73.2 41 
Spain 3.4 11 
U nited Kingdom 6.1 10 
Republic of Korea (South Korea) 2.8 6
Source: British Fluoridation Society (2013) bfs@bfsweb.org 
30.6 Factors Affecting fluoride Requirements 
The Adequate Intake (AI) 
The Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) of the US Institute of M edicine updated its 
recomm endations for fluoride intake in 1997. As data w ere insufficient to establish a 
Recomme nded D ietary Allowanc e (RDA) , AI levels were set based on estimated intakes that 
have been shown  to reduce the occurrence of dental caries most effectively without causing the 
unwanted side effect of tooth enamel mottling known as dental fluorosis (0.05 mg/kg of body 
weight) (Table 30.2) (IOM, 1997). 
Fluoridation is most protective wh en the tooth is being formed during the mineralisation 
process. This coincides with ages 1 to 1.5 years for incisors, at about 6 years for premolars, 
and ages 16 - 17 years for molars. Excess fluoride on the other hand may result in fluorosis. 
The World Health Organization (WHO) concluded that at a fluoride level of 0.9 mg/L to 1.2 mg /L, 
very m ild fluorosis occurs (WHO, 1997). Therefore, ensuring optimum levels of water fluoride 
is important especially during the mineralisation periods. 
507 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Flouride 
Table 30.2.  Adequate intake (AI) for fluoride 
Life Stage Age M ales (mg/day) Femal es (mg/day) 
Source: http://lpi.oregonstate.edu/mic/minerals/fluoride 
Infants 0-6 months 0.01 0.01 
Infants 7-12 months 0.5 0.5 
Children 1-3 years 0.7 0.7 
Children 4-8 years 1.0 1.0 
Children 9-13 years 2.0 2.0 
Adolescents 14-18 years 3.0 3.0 
Adults 19 years and older 4.0 3.0 
Pregnancy all ages - 3.0 
Breast-feeding all ages - 3.0 
Fluoride supplements 
Fluoride supplements in the U S are intended for infants six months and older and children 
up to 16 years of age living in areas with suboptimal w ater fluoridation for the purpose of 
bringing their intake to approximately 1 mg/day (IOM, 1997). The American Dental Association 
Council on Scientific Affairs recommends  the prescription of fluoride supplements only to 
children at high risk of developing dental caries (Rozier et al., 2010). The supplemental fluoride 
dosage schedule in Table 30.3 was recomm ended by the Am erican Den tal Association, the 
A merican Acad emy of Pediatric Dentistry, and the Ame rican Aca demy  of Pediatrics. It requires 
knowledge of the fluoride concentration of local drinking water, as well as other possible sources 
of fluoride intake. 
Table 30.3. American Dental Association Fluoride Supplement Schedule 
Age 
Fluoride Ion Level in Drinking Water (ppm)* 
<0.3 ppm 0.3-0.6 ppm >0.6 ppm 
Birth - 6 months None N one N one 
6 months - 3 years 0.25 mg/day** N one N one 
3 years - 6 years 0.50 mg/day 0.25 mg/day None 
6 years - 16 years 1.0 mg/day 0.50 mg/day None 
*1.0 part per million (ppm) = 1 milligram/liter (mg/L) 
(M icronutrient Information Centre, Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University) 
508 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Flouride 
Nutrient interactions 
Both calcium and magnesium form  insoluble complexes with fluoride and are capable of 
significantly decreasing fluoride absorption when present in the same meal. However, the 
absorption of fluoride in the form of monofluorophosphate is unaffected by calcium. Also, a diet 
low in chloride (salt) has been found to increase fluoride retention by reducing urinary excretion 
of fluoride (Cerklewski, 1997). 
Drug interactions 
Aluminum -containing antacids, can decrease the absorption of fluoride. It is best to take 
these products two hours before or after fluoride supplements. The use of small amounts of 
aluminium-containing antacids increased faecal fluoride significantly, thereby decreasing the 
intestinal absorption of fluoride. The dual effect of aluminium, name ly in causing calcium loss 
and inhibition of the intestinal absorption of fluoride, can result in adverse effects on bone 
which may contribute to bone loss. 
30.7 Setting requireme nts and recomm ended intake of flouride 
The E uropean Food Safety Authority (EFSA )‘s Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and 
Allergies (NDA  Panel) (2014) proposed AI for fluoride at 0.05 mg/kg body w eight per day for 
children aged 7 months to 17 years as well as adults, including pregnant and lactating women. 
Ac cording to IOM  (2006), the AI for fluoride for 0-6 mo ths is based on hum an milk 
fluoride content. The AIs for 6 months and older are based on the intake values that max imally 
reduce the occurrence of dental caries in a group of individuals without causing unw anted 
effects including moderate tooth enamel mottling known as dental fluorosis. The IOM (2006) 
proposed the following dietary Reference Intakes (refer Table 30.4) for various age groups: 
509 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Flouride 
D RI values (mg/day) 
AI 
m ales females 
Life Stage Group 
0 through 6 month 0.01 0.01 
7 through 12 month 0.5 0.5 
1 through 3 years 0.7 0.7 
4 through 8 years 11
9  through 13 years 22
14 through 18 years 33
19 through 30 years 43
31 through 50 years 43
51 through 70 years 43
> 70 years 43
Pregnancy 
≤ 18 years 3
19 through 50 years 3
Lactation 
≤ 18 years 3
19 through 50 years 3
Reference: IOM (2006) 
Table 30.4: Dietary Reference Intakes by Age Groups 
U pon reviewing both reports, the TSC on Minerals and Trace Elements agreed to adapt 
the IOM (2006) values as the RNI for Malaysia 2017. 
30.8 Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (UL) 
Adverse effects 
Fluoridation of public drinking wa ter in the US was initiated nearly 70 years ago. A 
num ber of adverse effects have been attributed to water fluoridation, but extensive scientific 
research has uncovered no evidence of increased risks of cancer, heart disease, kidney disease, 
liver disease, thyroid disease, Alzheimer’s disease, birth defects, or Down’s syndrom e (Whitford, 
2011; US Department of Health and Human Services, 2015; Committee on Fluoride in Drinking 
Wat er NRC. 2006).  
510 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Flouride 
Toxicity may  arise due to ingestion of excess fluoride from multiple sources: drinking 
water supplies, food processed in areas containing high levels of fluoride, use of toothpastes 
w ith high fluoride contents, intake of plant foods grown in soil with fluorides added to fertilizers, 
and high consumption of sea foods. 
Dental flourosis 
Children exposed to too much fluoride w hile the ename l of their teeth is being formed 
may develop dental fluorosis. In its mild form, this leads to discolouration. When  it is more 
severe, the tooth enamel is pitted. It can affect both the first set of teeth (baby or milk teeth) and 
the second set, which remain through adult life. The mildest form  of dental fluorosis is 
detectable only to the trained observer and is characterized by small opaque wh ite flecks or 
spots on the ename l of the teeth. Moderate dental fluorosis is characterized by mottling and mild 
staining of the teeth, and severe dental fluorosis results in marked staining and pitting of the 
teeth. In its moderate to severe forms, dental fluorosis becomes a cosme tic concern when it 
affects the incisors and canines (front teeth). It is also a dose dependent condition, with higher 
fluoride intakes being associated with more pronounced effects on the teeth. The incidence of 
mild and mod erate dental fluorosis has increased over the past decades, m ainly due to 
increasing fluoride intake from reconstituted infant formula. 
Fluoridated toothpastes are effective in preventing dental caries but also add considerably 
to fluoride intake of children, especially young children wh o are more likely to sw allow 
toothpaste. Researchers estimate that children under six years of age may ingest an average of 
0.3 mg of fluoride from toothpaste with each brushing and are at increased risk of a white 
speckling or mottling of the perm anent teeth, known as dental fluorosis. The American Dental 
Association (2014) recommended that parents supervise children under six years of age while 
brushing with fluoridated toothpaste. 
Skeletal fluorosis 
Intake of fluoride at excessive levels for long periods of time ma y lead to changes in 
bone structure known as skeletal fluorosis. Fluoride weakens the bone structure by 
incorporation in the mineral matrix of bone. The early stages of skeletal fluorosis are 
characterized by increased bone mass, detectable by x-ray. If very high fluoride intake persists 
over many years, joint pain and stiffness may result from the skeletal changes. The most severe 
form of skeletal fluorosis is known as “crippling skeletal fluorosis,” which may result in 
calcification of ligame nts, immo bility, muscle wasting, and neurological problems  related to 
spinal cord compression. 
Skeletal fluorosis has been reported in India, China and Africa in regions with high 
concentrations of fluoride in drinking water, or where coal containing fluoride is burnt indoors. 
In China, a meta-analysis of 27 studies, mainly conducted in China, found lower intelligence 
quotients (IQs) in children exposed to fluoride concentrations ranging from 1.8 mg/L to 11.5 
mg/L of drinking water (Choi et al., 2012).  In Europe it has only been seen in some workers in 
the chemical and mineral processing industries.  
511 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Flouride 
Serious limitations, including substantial heterogeneity amo ng studies and co- 
occurrence of other neurotoxicants in drinking water, hinder the strength of the finding and its 
application to US settings. The Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics has recently estimated that 
only limited evidence supports an association between fluoride content in water and the IQs of 
children (Palmer and Gilbert, 2012).  A recent prospective study in a New Zealand population- 
based cohort followed for nearly four decades found no association between fluoride exposure 
in the context of community water fluoridation programs  and IQs measured during childhood 
and at 38 years of age (Broadbent et al., 2015).  
W ater fluoridation has not been linked with bone fractures, and modest fluoridation may 
even lower bone fracture risk. Animal and human studies have examined other possible risks 
from  fluoride intake. They have not found clear links between fluoride and bone cancer, or with 
other suggested risks such as neurological or reproductive effects. 
Acute toxicity 
Fluoride is toxic w hen consum ed in excessive am ounts, so concentrated fluoride 
products should be used and stored with caution to prevent the possibility of acute fluoride 
poisoning, especially in children and other vulnerable individuals. The lowest dose that could 
trigger adverse symptoms is considered to be 5 mg /kg of body weight, with the lowest 
potentially fatal dose considered 15 mg/kg of body weight. Nausea, abdom inal pain, and 
vom iting almost always accomp any acute fluoride toxicity. O ther symptoms like diarrhea, 
excessive salivation and tearing, sweating, and generalized weakness may also occur. 
In order to prevent acute fluoride poisoning, the Ame rican D ental Association (2014) 
has recom men ded that no more than 120 mg of fluoride (224 mg of sodium fluoride) be 
dispensed at one time and toothpaste, although inappropriate for use as fluoride supplements 
ma y also contribute. In 1997, the US Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) of the Institute of Medicine 
set the tolerable upper intake level (UL) for fluoride based on the prevention of moderate enam el 
fluorosis (Table 30.4). 
The U L for fluoride for individuals aged 9 years and older was derived using data on the 
risk of developing early signs of skeletal fluorosis, which is associated with a fluoride intake 
greater than 10 mg/day for a period of 10 years or longer. The UL for infants and children 
younger than 8 years old was based on a critical adverse effect of developing fluorosis of the 
anterior teeth, not skeletal fluorosis. 
512 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Flouride 
Table 30.4.  Tolerable upper intake level (UL) for fluoride 
Age Group U L (mg/day) 
Infants 0-6 months 0.7 
Infants 7-12 months 0.9 
Children 1-3 years 1.3 
Children 4-8 years  2.2 
Children 9-13 years  10.0 
A dolescents 14-18 years 10.0 
A dults 19 years and older 10.0 
30.9 Research Recomm endations 
Fluoride may play an important role in maintaining the bone mass. In view of the high 
incidence of osteoporosis and its complications, and in view of the fact that fluoride is beneficial 
for the treatment of osteoporosis, studies have been carried out in this research unit to 
determine the retention and excretion of fluoride both during a norma l dietary intake of fluoride 
and during fluoride supplementation. Such studies are lacking in the M alaysian population. 
Studies in estimated fluoride intake are outdated. Foo and Chong (19 75) estimated that the 
average daily fluoride intakes by adults in the fluoridated and non-fluoridated areas were about 
1.5 mg and 1 mg respectively, based on testing urine and food samples. 
In children, excessive ingestion of fluoride from different sources including bottled 
drinking w ater and flavoured beverages can lead to dental fluorosis. In addition, low pH level 
of beverages can cause dental erosion. The mean pH of bottled-drinking water was near neutral 
(6.96±0.17), but found to be acidic for drinks sold in supermarkets (4.78.00±0.49) and hawkers 
(5.73±0.24), with lychee packet drink having the lowest pH level (2.97±0.03) (Zubaidah et al., 
2014).  More studies should be undertaken to determine the fluoride and pH levels of drinks and 
beverages commonl y available to children. 
513 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Flouride 
30.10 R eferences 
A merican Dental Association Council on Scientific Affairs (2014).  Fluoride toothpaste use for 
young children. J Am Dent Assoc. 145(2):190-191 
Broadbent JM, Thomson WM , Ramrakha S, TE Moffit, J Zeng, LA F Page, R Poulton (2015). 
Commun ity Water Fluoridation and Intelligence: Prospective Study in N ew Zealand. Am 
J Cerklew ski FL (1998) . Fluoride— essential or just beneficial. Nu trition 14 (5): 475-476. 
Cerklewski FL (1997). Fluoride bioavailability— nutritional and clinical aspects. Nutr Res. 
17:907-929 
Choi AL, Sun G, Zhang Y, Grandjean P (2012). Developmen tal fluoride neurotoxicity: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Environ Health Perspect. 120 (10):1362-1368 
Commit tee on Fluoride in Drinking Water NRC (2006). Fluoride in drinking water: a scientific 
review of EPA’s Standards. Washington D.C.: National Academies Press. 
Cutrufelli R, Pehrsson P , Haytowitz D, Patterson K, Holden J (2005). US DA  Na tional Fluoride 
D atabase of Selected Beverages and Foods, Release 2. Nu trient Data Laboratory, 
Beltsville Hum an Nutrition Research Center, A gricultural Research Service, US 
D epartm ent of A griculture. Avail able at: 
http://www. ars.usda.gov/SP2UserFiles/Place/123545 00/Data/Fluoride/F02.pdf. 
EFS A  Panel on Di etetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies (ND A) (2014. Scientific Opinion on 
the substantiation of a health claim related to DHA and contribution to norma l brain 
development pursuant to Article 14 of Regulation (EC) No 1924/2006. EFSA Journal. 12 
(10):3840, 8 pp. doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2014.3840. 
Foo LC, Chong YH (1975). Fluoride studies in Mala ysia. Sou theast Asian J Trop Med Public 
H ealth. 6(2):264-8. 
Institute of M edicine (IOM) (1997). Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference Intakes: 
Calcium, Phosphorus, Magnesium, Vitamin D and Fluoride external link disclaimer. 
Washi ngton, DC: National Academy Press. 
Institute of Medicine (IOM) (2006). Dietary Reference Intakes: The Essential Guide to Nutrient 
R equireme nts. J. J. Otten, J. P . Hellwig and L. D. Meyers. Wa shington, D.C, N ational 
A cademy of Sciences. 
M inistry of Health Malaysia. (2011).National Oral Health Plan for Ma laysia 2011 - 2020. Oral 
Health Division, Ministry of Health. Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 
Palmer CA, Gilbert JA (2012), Academy of Nutr, Dietetics. Position of the Academy of Nutrition 
and Dietetics: the impact of fluoride on health. J Acad Nutr Diet. 112(9):1443-14. 
514 R ecom mended Nut rient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Flouride 
Rozier RG, A dair S, Graham F, et al. Evidence-based clinical recomm endations on the 
prescription of dietary fluoride supplemen ts for caries prevention: a report of the 
Ame rican D ental Assoc iation Council on Scientific Affairs. J Am  Dent Ass oc. 2010; 
141(12):1480-1489 
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (2013). NSF  Fact Sheet on Fluoridation 
Products:  http://www.cdc.gov/fluoridation.  
US Depa rtmen t of Health and Human  Services Federal Panel on Community  Water Fluoridation. 
(2015).  US Public health service recom mendation for fluoride concentration in drinking 
water for the prevention of dental caries. Public H ealth Reports. Volume 130 A vailable 
at: http://www.publichealthreports.org/docume nts/PHS_2015_Fluoride_Guide lines.pdf 
(accessed June 30 2016) 
Whitford GM (2011). Acute toxicity of ingested fluoride. Mon ogr Oral Sci. 22 : 66-80 
Wor ld Health Organization - WHO. (1997). Fluorides and oral health: Report of a WHO  expert 
on oral health status and fluoride uses. WHO, Ge neva. 2-8. 
Zubaidah HAR, Marina MB,  Zakir HM, Ahmed IA, Zulkifli NA (2014). High fluoride and low pH 
level have been detected in popular flavoured beverages in Mal aysia. Pak J Med Sci. 
2014 Mar-Apr; 30(2): 404-408. 
515 Recommended N utrient Intakes 
for Malaysia 
Flouride 
M alaysia (2017)* 
Age group RNI (µg/day) Age group AI (µg/day) 
IOM  (2006) 
Infants Infants 
0 - 6 months             0.01 0 - 6 months            0.01 
7 -12 months            0.5 7 -12 months             0.5 
Children Children 
1 - 3 years                  0.7 1 - 3 years                 0.7 
4 - 8 years                  1.0 4 - 8 years                1.0 
Boys Boys 
9 - 13 years                  2.0 9 - 13 years                 2.0 
14 -18 years               3.0 14 - 18 years              3.0 
G irls Girls 
9 - 13 years                  2.0 9 - 13 years                 2.0 
14 - 18 years               3.0 14 - 18 years              3.0 
M en M en 
19 - 30 years                4.0 19 - 30 years               4.0 
31 - 50 years                4.0 31 - 50 years               4.0 
50 - 70 years                4.0 50 - 70 years               4.0 
>70 years                   4.0 >70 years                  4.0 
W omen Wome n 
19 - 30 years                3.0 19 - 30 years               3.0 
31 - 50 years                3.0 31 - 50 years               3.0 
50 - 70 years                3.0   50 - 70 years               3.0 
>70 years                   3.0  >70 years                  3.0     
Pregnancy Pregnancy 
14-18 years old         3.0 14 - 18 years old         3.0 
19-50 years old         3.0 19 - 50 years old         3.0 
Lactation Lactation 
14-18 years old          3.0 14-18 years old         3.0 
19-50 years old          3.0 19-50 years old         3.0 
*refer to AI 
Appendix 30.1: Comparison of recommended intake for Flouride: RNI Malaysia (201 7) and IOM (2006) 
516 R ecom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Recom men ded N utrientIntake ofM alaysiaC onsensus Wo rkshop 
Recommended Nutrient Intakeof 
MalaysiaConsensus Workshop 
10–11January 2017 
ParticipantsList
Re sourcePersons 
Khor G eok Lin(UPM) 
Mohd IsmailNoor,(Taylor’sUniversity) 
Poh Bee Koon, (UKM) 
Tee E Siong (NSM) 
Secretariatand Rapporteurs 
Fadw aAli(M OH) 
Fatimah ZurinaMohamad (MOH)
Gui ShirLey (MOH) 
Intan HartiniAhmad Bidin(MOH) 
KhairulZarinaMohd Yusop (MOH) 
Muham adAzwan Kamarudin(MOH) 
Munirah Mohd Nasir(MOH) 
Norashikin R amlan(MOH) 
Nur Am alinaM uhamad (MOH) 
SeriW irdaningsihAhmad Wasil(MOH) 
SitiA dibahAb Halim (MOH)
Participants 
Am inIsmail(UPM) 
Am inahAbdullah(UKM) 
Arfah Mahani Hj Amran (MOH) 
AzwaniShukri(UIAM) 
ChaiWen Jin(M SN) 
Chan Yoke M un (UPM) 
Chin YitSiew (UPM) 
DanielH o (NPR A)
Fatimah Sulong(M OH) 
Foo Leng Huat(USM) 
Gowri Nagapan (M POB ) 
GunasundariA /PM arimuthu(MOH) 
Hamid Jan Jan M ohamed (US M ) 
HanapiJusoh (UIAM ) 
Hasnah Harun(UKM ) 
HasreenaHashim (FM M ) 
HaziziAbu Saad(UPM ) 
Jamilah Ahmad (MOH) 
Kanga RaniSelvadury (M POB ) 
Loh Su Peng (UP M) 
517 Rec ommended N utrient Intakes
for Mal ay sia 
Recom men ded N utrientIntake ofM alaysiaC onsensusWorksho p 
Ma hendranAppukutty(UiTM) 
MirnaliniKandiah(UC SI) 
Moham ad HasnanAhmad (IKU) 
Mohd A kram Ahmad Sabri(MOH) 
Mohd FairulnizalM d.Noh (IMR ) 
Mohd R ashdanAbd Rashid(JPM) 
Mohd R azifShahril(UniSZA) 
Mohd SokhiniAbd M utalib(UPM) 
Moy Foong M ing(UM) 
Muham m adYazidJalaudin(UM) 
N azliSuhardiIbrahim (MOH) 
N ik Mazlan Mamat (UIAM) 
N ik ShanitaSafii(UKM) 
N oorUl-AzihaMuha mmad (MOH) 
N orAzlianaM ohamatNor (M OH) 
N orAzwani Shukri(UIAM) 
N orazm irM d Nor (UiTM ) 
N orim ahA.Karim (UKM) 
N orlida Zulkafly(M OH)
N orsharizaJamhusi(IKN) 
N urulA kmal M ohd Wa zai(MOH) 
N urulA znydaNorizan(IPR ) 
N urulHuda Ibrahim(MOH) 
PuvaneswariM eganathan (MPOB ) 
Rashadiba Ibrahim@ R ahman (MOH) 
Ravin Chin(NPRA) 
RazaliMoha med Salleh (UiTM ) 
RohanaAbdul Ghani(UiTM ) 
Rokiah Don (IMU) 
RoselineYap (Taylor'sUniversity) 
RosliM ohd Sali(HKL ) 
RusidahSelama t(M OH) 
RuzitaAbd Talib(UKM ) 
SharifahWa jihah Wa fa (UniSZA) 
SharifahZahhuraSyed Abdullah(USM ) 
SharvinA.Subramaniam (FOM C A) 
SitiShuhailah ShaikhAbd R ahim (M OH) 
SokhiniAbd M utalib(UPM ) 
Suzana Shahar(UKM ) 
TilakavatiKarrupiah (UKM ) 
Umi Kalsum HusainZan ( M AR DI )
ViolaMicheal(M OH) 
WinnieC hee Siew Swe e (M DA) 
Wong JyhEiin(UKM) 
Yap LeeSheer(FM M) 
Yasmin Ooi B eng Houi (UM S) 
ZaitonDaud (M OH) 
ZaitunM d Yasin(NSM ) 
Zaleha M d Isa (UKM ) 
Zalilah Mo hd Shariff(UPM) 
Zalma Abd ulR azak (M OH) 
518 R ecom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Acknowledgemen ts 
Acknowledgement 
T he TechnicalCom mitteeon Re com men ded NutrientIntakesforM alaysia 
acknowledgesthe supportofthefollowing organizations. 
Ministry ofHealthM alaysia 
NationalCoordinatingC ommitteeon Food and Nutrition 
InstituteforM edicalR esearch
InstituteforPublicHealth 
NationalC ancerInstitute,M alaysia 
UniversitiKebangsaan M alaysia 
UniversitiPutra M alaysia 
UniversitiSainsM alaysia 
InternationalIslamic UniversityM alaysia 
UniversitiTeknologiMAR A 
UniversitiSultan ZainalAbidin 
UCS IUniversity 
Taylor’sUniversity 
UniversitiM alaya 
UniversitiM alaya M edicalC entre 
HospitalUniversitiKebangsaan Ma laysia 
M alaysianPalm OilB oard 
M alaysian Agriculture R esearch and DevelopmentInstitute
NutritionSocietyofMa laysia 
M alaysian Dietitians’Association 
M alaysian AssociationfortheStudyofObesity 
FederationofM alaysianM anufacturers
FederationofM alaysian Consume rsAssociation
PrimeM inisterDepartment 
519 Rec ommended N utrient Intakes
for Mal ay sia 
Sum ma ry Table 
RECOM M ENDED NUTRIENT INTAKES
FOR M ALAYSIA 2017
SUM M ARY TABLES
NCCFN (2017).RECOM M ENDED NUTRIENT INTAKES FOR M ALAYSIA.
A REPORT OF THE TECHNICAL W ORKING GROUP ON NUTRITIONAL GUIDELINES.
NATIONAL COORDINATING COM M ITTEE ON FOOD AND NUTRITION,
M INISTRY OF HEALTH M ALAYSIA,PUTRAJAYA
520 R ecom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Summ ary Tables 
Protein2
g/day
R ecom m ended N utrientIntakes (R N I)forM alaysia 2017 Sum m ary Tables 1.Energy R equirem ents (by physicalactivity level)and Protein R equirem ents
Age
M ales
Estim ated Energy R equirem ents1 kcal/day Protein2
g/day
Fem ales
Estim ated Energy R equirem ents1 kcal/day
Infants
0 - 2 m onths 470 8 420 8
3 - 5 m onths 540 8 500 8
6 -8 m onths 630 10 570 10
9 -11 m onths 720 10 660 10
PAL 1.4 PAL 1.6 PAL 1.8 PAL 2.0 PAL 1.4 PAL 1.6 PAL 1.8 PAL 2.0
Children
1 - 3 years 980 12 900 12
4 - 6 years 1300 1490 1670 16 1210 1380 1560 16
7 - 9 years 1530 1750 1970 23 1410 1610 1810 23
Adolescents
10 -12 years 1690 1930 2170 2420 30 1500 1710 1920 2140 31
13 -15years 1930 2210 2480 2760 45 1580 1810 2040 2260 42
16 -<18 years 2050 2340 2640 2930 51 1660 1890 2130 2370 42
Adults
≥ 18 -29 years 1960 2240 2520 2800 62 1610 1840 2080 2310 53
30 -59 years 1920 2190 2470 2740 61 1660 1900 2130 2370 52
≥ 60 years 1780 2030 2280 2540 58 1550 1770 1990 2220 50
Pregnancy
1st trim ester +80 +0.5
2nd trim ester +280 +8
3rd trim ester +470 +25
Lactation
1st six m onths + 500 +19
2nd six m onths + 13
N ote: 1 For children aged 4 – 6 years,PAL 1.4 is recom m ended to be used for the generalpopulation.For children above 7 years,adolescents and adults,PAL of1.6 (i.e.m oderately active) is recom m ended to be used
for the generalpopulation.For individuals,energy recom m endation should be based on individualPAL.
2 Protein calculated based on reference body w eight.
521 Rec ommended N utrient Intakes
for Mal ay sia 
Sum ma ryTables 
Recom m ended NutrientIntakes (RNI) forM alaysia 2017 Sum m ary Tables 2:Vitam ins
Age Thiam in
m g/day
Riboflavin
m g/day
Niacin
m g NE/day
Pantothenic
Acid m g/day
Pyridoxine
m g/day
Folate
µg/day
Cobalam in
µg/day
Vitam in C
m g/day
Vitam in A
µg/day
Vitam in D
µg/day
Vitam in E
m g/day
Vitam in K
µg/day
Infants (boys) 0 - 5 m onths 0.2 0.3 2 1.7 0.1 80 1.2 25 375 10 3 5
6 - 11 m onths 0.3 0.4 4 1.8 0.3 80 1.5 30 400 10 3 10
Infants (girls) 0 - 5 m onths 0.2 0.3 2 1.7 0.1 80 1.2 25 375 10 3 5
6 - 11 m onths 0.3 0.4 4 1.8 0.3 80 1.5 30 400 10 3 10
Children (boys) 1 - 3 years 0.5 0.5 6 2.0 0.5 160 1.5 30 400 15 5 15
4 - 6 years 0.6 0.6 8 3.0 0.6 200 1.5 30 450 15 5 20
7 - 9 years 0.9 0.9 12 4.0 1.0 300 2.5 35 500 15 7 25
Children (girls) 1 - 3 years 0.5 0.5 6 2.0 0.5 160 1.5 30 400 15 5 15
4 - 6 years 0.6 0.6 8 3.0 0.6 200 1.5 30 450 15 5 20
7 - 9 years 0.9 0.9 12 4.0 1.0 300 2.5 35 500 15 7 25
Adolescent(boys) 10 - 12 years 1.2 1.3 16 5.0 1.3 400 3.5 65 600 15 10 35-55
13 - 14 years 1.2 1.3 16 5.0 1.3 400 4.0 65 600 15 10 35-55
15 years 1.2 1.3 16 5.0 1.3 400 4.0 65 600 15 10 35-55
16 - 18 years 1.2 1.3 16 5.0 1.3 400 4.0 65 600 15 10 35-55
Adolescent(girls) 10 - 12 years 1.1 1.0 16 5.0 1.2 400 3.5 65 600 15 7.5 35-55
13 - 14 years 1.1 1.0 16 5.0 1.2 400 4.0 65 600 15 7.5 35-55
15 years 1.1 1.0 16 5.0 1.2 400 4.0 65 600 15 7.5 35-55
16 - 18 years 1.1 1.0 16 5.0 1.2 400 4.0 65 600 15 7.5 35-55
M en 19 - 29 years 1.2 1.3 16 5.0 1.3 400 4.0 70 600 15 10 65
30 - 50 years 1.2 1.3 16 5.0 1.3 400 4.0 70 600 15 10 65
51 - 59 years 1.2 1.3 16 5.0 1.7 400 4.0 70 600 15 10 65
60 - 65 years 1.2 1.3 16 5.0 1.7 400 4.0 70 600 15 10 65
> 65 years 1.2 1.3 16 5.0 1.7 400 4.0 70 600 20 10 65
W om en 19 - 29 years 1.1 1.1 14 5.0 1.3 400 4.0 70 600 15 7.5 55
30 - 50 years 1.1 1.1 14 5.0 1.3 400 4.0 70 600 15 7.5 55
51 - 59 years 1.1 1.1 14 5.0 1.5 400 4.0 70 600 15 7.5 55
60 - 65 years 1.1 1.1 14 5.0 1.5 400 4.0 70 600 15 7.5 55
> 65 years 1.1 1.1 14 5.0 1.5 400 4.0 70 600 20 7.5 55
Pregnancy 1st trim ester 1.4 1.4 18 6.0 1.9 600 4.5 80 800 15 7.5 55
2nd trim ester 1.4 1.4 18 6.0 1.9 600 4.5 80 800 15 7.5 55
3rd trim ester 1.4 1.4 18 6.0 1.9 600 4.5 80 800 15 7.5 55
Lactation 1st 6 m onths 1.5 1.6 17 7.0 2.0 500 5.0 95 850 15 7.5 55
2nd 6 m onths 1.5 1.6 17 7.0 2.0 500 5.0 95 850 15 7.5 55
522 R ecom mended NutrientIntakes
for Malaysia 
Summ ary Tables 
Recom m ended NutrientIntakes(RNI)forM alaysia 2017 Sum m aryTables3a:M inerals& Trace Elem ents
Age Calcium
m g/day
Iodine
µg/day
Selenium
µg/day
Zinc
m g/day
Iron m g/day
10% 15%
Infants(boys) 0 -5 m onths 200 (bf) 67.5 (0 -2 m onths) 6 1.1 (bf) a a
250 (ff) 105.0 (3 -5 m onths) 2.8 (ff)
6 -11 m onths 260 124.5 (6 -8 m onths) 10 4.1 9 6
138.0 (9 -11 m om ths)
Infants(girls) 0 -5 m onths 200 (bf) 63.0 (0 -2 m onths) 6 1.1 (bf) a a
250 (ff) 96.0 (3 -5 m onths) 2.8 (ff)
6 -11 m onths 260 114.0 (6 -8 m onths) 9 3.7 9 6
127.5 (9 -11 m om ths)
Children (boys) 1 -3 years 700 73.2 17 4.2 6 4
4 -6 years 1000 109.8 21 5.2 6 4
7 -9 years 1000 101.6 22 5.7 9 6
Children (girls) 1 -3 years 700 69.0 16 4.0 6 4
4 - 6 years 1000 109.2 21 5.2 6 4
7 -9 years 1000 100.0 21 5.6 9 6
Adolescent(boys) 10 -12 years 1300 133.6 21 7.0 15 10
13 -14 years 1300 99.2 31 9.3 15 10
15 years 1300 99.2 31 9.3 19 12
16 -18 years 1300 118.4 37 9.9 19 12
Adolescent(girls) 10 -12 years 1300 141.6 19 6.3 14 (nm ) 9 (nm )
33 (m ) 22 (m )
13 -14 years 1300 93.0 24 7.7 14 (nm ) 9 (nm )
33 (m ) 22 (m )
15 years 1300 93.0 24 7.7 31 21
16 -18 years 1300 100.6 26 7.7 31 21
M en 19 -29 years 1000 122.8 32 6.6 14 9
30 -50 years 1000 121.2 32 6.5 14 9
51 -59 years 1000 121.2 32 6.5 14 9
60 -65 years 1000 116.2 31 6.3 14 9
> 65 years 1000 116.2 30 6.2 14 9
W om en 19 -29 years 1000 105.8 25 4.7 29 20
30 -50 years 1000 104.4 24 4.6 29 20
51 -59 years 1200 104.4 24 4.6 11 8
60 -65 years 1200 99.0 23 4.4 11 8
> 65 years 1200 99.0 23 4.3 11 8
Pregnancy 13 -19 1300
1sttrim ester 1000 200 25 5.5 b b
2nd trim ester 1000 200 27 7.0 b b
3rd trim ester 1000 200 29 10.0 b b
Lactation 13 -19 1300 200
1st6 m onths 1000 200 34 9.5 (1 -3m ths) 15 10
8.8 (4 -6 m ths)
2nd 6 m onths 1000 200 41 7.2 (7 -12m ths) 15 (nm ) 10 (nm )
32(m ) 21(m )
Note: a– no recom m endations.Neonataliron storesaresufficientto m eetiron requirem entforfirst6 m onthsin full-term intants.Prem atureinfantsand low birth weightinfantsrequireadditionaliron.
b – iron supplem entsin tableform recom m ended forallpregnantwom en.In thenon-anaem icpregnantwom an,dailysupplem entsof100 m g iron given during second halfofpregnancyareadequate.In anaem ic
wom en,higherdosesareusuallyrequired. bf– breastfed ff– form ulafed nm – non-m enstruating m – m enstruating
523 Rec ommended N utrient Intakes
for Mal ay sia 
Sum ma ryTables 
Recom m ended NutrientIntakes(RNI)forM alaysia 2017 Sum m aryTables3b:M inerals& Trace Elem ents
Age Phosphorus
m g/day
Sodium
m g/day
Potassium
g/day
M agnesium
m g/day
Chrom ium
µg/day
Copper
µg/day
M anganese
m g/day
M olybdenum
µg/day
Fluoride
m g/day
Infants(boys) 0 -6 m onths 100 120 0.4 30 0.2 200 0.003 2 0.01
7 -12 m onths 275 370 0.7 75 5.5 220 0.6 3 0.5
Infants(girls) 0 -6 m onths 100 120 0.4 30 0.2 200 0.003 2 0.01
7 -12 m onths 275 370 0.7 75 5.5 220 0.6 3 0.5
Children (boys) 1 -3 years 460 1000 3.0 80 11 340 1.2 17 0.7
4 -8 years 500 1200 3.8 130 15 440 1.5 22 1.0
Children (girls) 1 -3 years 460 1000 3.0 80 11 340 1.2 17 0.7
4 -8 years 500 1200 3.8 130 15 440 1.5 22 1.0
Adolescent(boys) 9 -13 years 1250 1500 4.5 240 25 700 1.9 34 2.0
14 -18 years 1250 1500 4.7 410 35 890 2.2 43 3.0
Adolescent(girls) 9 -13 years 1250 1500 4.5 240 21 700 1.6 34 2.0
14 -18 years 1250 1500 4.7 360 24 890 1.6 43 3.0
M en 19 -29 years 700 1500 4.7 400 35 900 2.3 45 4.0
30 -50 years 700 1500 4.7 420 35 900 2.3 45 4.0
51 -59 years 700 1500 4.7 420 30 900 2.3 45 4.0
60 -69 years 700 1500 4.7 420 30 900 2.3 45 4.0
> 70 years 700 1200 4.7 420 30 900 2.3 45 4.0
W om en 19 -29 years 700 1500 4.7 310 25 900 1.8 45 3.0
30 -50 years 700 1500 4.7 320 25 900 1.8 45 3.0
51 -59 years 700 1500 4.7 420 20 900 1.8 45 3.0
60 -69 years 700 1500 4.7 420 20 900 1.8 45 3.0
> 70 years 700 1200 4.7 320 20 900 1.8 45 3.0
Pregnancy 14 -18 years 1250 1500 4.7 400 29 1000 2.0 50 3.0
19 -30 years 700 1500 4.7 350 30 1000 2.0 50 3.0
31 -50 years 700 1500 4.7 360 30 1000 2.0 50 3.0
Lactation 14 -18 years 1250 1500 5.1 360 44 1300 2.6 50 3.0
19 -30 years 700 1500 5.1 310 45 1300 2.6 50 3.0
31 -50 years 700 1500 5.1 320 45 1300 2.6 50 3.0

