DIE
MAL
M
MOH/K/BPM/05.21(GU)
Y
Y
AN
R
AR
A
DELINES
SIA
Y
Y
L
A
ET
GUI
ing Co
dinat
ional Coor
at
N
Y
TR
MINI S
ood a
ee on F
t
ommit
TH MAL
Y  O F HEA L
2020
CCF
ion (N
it
utr
and N
S I A
Y
A
L
FN)
2 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
National Coordinating Committee on Food and Nutrition
Ministry of Health Malaysia
II Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
ISBN: 978-967-19598-2-4 
 
 
First Published in Malaysia 1999 
Second Published in Malaysia 2010 
Third Published in Malaysia 2021 
 
Copyright © 2021 National Coordinating Committee on Food and Nutrition 
Ministry of Health Malaysia, 2021 
 
 
All rights reserved.  No part of this publication may be produced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording and/or otherwise, without prior written permission from the 
publisher. Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Chairperson, 
National Coordinating Committee on Food and Nutrition (NCCFN). 
 
Suggested citation 
NCCFN. 2021. Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020. National Coordinating Committee 
on Food and Nutrition, Ministry of Health Malaysia. 
 
 
Published by,  
Technical Working Group on Nutrition Guidelines 
For National Coordinating Committee on Food and Nutrition 
 
c/o   
Nutrition Division 
Ministry of Health Malaysia 
Level 1, Block E3, Parcel E 
Federal Government Administration Centre 
62590 Putrajaya, Malaysia
MINISTRY OF HEAL TH
GUIDELINES 
DIETARY
MALAYSIAN
National Coordinating Committee on Food and Nutrition
Ministry of Health Malaysia

IV Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Message by Minister of Health Malaysia VI 
 
Foreword by Director - General of Health Malaysia VII 
 
Preface by Deputy Director - General of Health Malaysia (Public Health) Malaysia VIII 
 
Preface by Chairman of Technical Working Group on Nutritional Guidelines IX 
 
Acknowledgement X 
 
Technical Working Group on Nutritional Guidelines XI 
 
List of Authors XII 
 
Editorial Board XVI 
 
Coordination and Documentation XVII 
 
List of Tables, Figures and Appendices XVIII 
 
Executive Summary XXII 
 
List of Content
VMalaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Key Message 1 : Eat a variety of foods within the recommended servings 1 
 
Key Message 2 : Achieve and maintain a healthy body weight 31 
 
Key Message 3 :  
Be physically active every day 57 
 
Key Message 4 :  
Cook nutritious foods at home more often and choose healthier 81 
options when eating out 
 
Key Message 5 : Eat plenty of vegetables and fruits everyday 91  
 
Key Message 6 : Eat adequate amounts of rice, other cereals, whole grain cereal-based
107 
products and tubers  
 
Key Message 7 : Consume moderate amounts of fish, meat, poultry
, egg, legumes and nuts 119 
 
Key Message 8 :  
Consume adequate amounts of milk and milk products 133 
 
Key Message 9 : Reduce intake of foods high in fat and limit saturated fat intake 139
 
 
Key Message 10 :  
Choose and prepare foods with less salt, sauces and flavour enhancers 159 
 
Key Message 11
: Limit sugar intake in foods and beverages 177 
 
Key Message 12 :  
Drink plenty of water daily 195 
 
Key Message 13 :  
Consume safe and clean foods and beverages 205 
 
Key Message 14 : Make ef
fective use of nutrition information on food labels 223 
 
Focus Group Discussion on Malaysian Dietary Guidelines, MDG 2020 (5 - 7 Feb 2020) 257 
 
Concensus Meeting on Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 (22 - 24 July 2020) 261
VI Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
E
ffective messaging promoting healthy eating is a 
critical strategy that will allow for prevention, and 
help control the burden of malnutrition in the 
country. It is for this reason the Malaysian Dietary 
Guidelines (MDG) were formulated in 1996 and were 
revised in both 2010 and 2020 to ensure that all 
Malaysians have access to reliable and accurate 
nutritional information. The Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 
2020 were thoroughly reviewed, taking into consideration 
diet-related non-communicable diseases and dietary 
patterns of Malaysians from all walks of life. 
 
The Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020, intended for 
adults aged 18 to 59 years old, provide key messages to 
assist healthcare practitioners in guiding Malaysians on 
healthy eating practices. It is also an essential resource 
for health professionals, academicians, non-government 
organisations, and other stakeholders and policymakers 
to design practical healthy eating recommendations for 
Malaysians. I hope that these MDGs are beneficial in our 
effort to curb malnutrition in Malaysia.  
 
I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude and 
congratulations to the Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Technical Working Group members and to those who 
have contributed to the development of the MDGs 
directly or indirectly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Khairy Jamaluddin 
Minister 
Ministry of Health Malaysia
Message by 
Minister of Health Malaysia
VIIMalaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
D
iet-related non-communicable diseases are an 
undeniable consequence of an unhealthy lifestyle. 
Apart from sedentary or inactive lifestyles, 
unhealthy dietary practices have further aggravated the 
problems. The prevalence of these chronic diet-related 
diseases is increasing at an alarming rate. The non-
communicable diseases burden forms a public health risk 
with a high financial impact and intangible losses due to 
decreased productivity. Therefore, it is timely for the 
Ministry of Health Malaysia to strengthen the advocacy of 
healthy lifestyles, including healthy eating to the 
population. 
 
The Malaysian Dietary Guidelines were developed at the 
national level to assist health professionals and other 
stakeholders in educating the Malaysian population 
about healthy eating. Since 1999, this document has 
been reviewed periodically to ensure that it continues to 
be relevant to the current and future nutritional situation 
in the country. The Malaysian Dietary Guidelines was 
moulded on from the latest peer-reviewed scientific 
evidence to warrant substantiate and effective 
recommendations, and it will complement other initiatives 
to cultivate healthy eating practices amongst Malaysian 
adults. 
 
Therefore, I envisioned the Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 
2020 as the main reference in the country for healthy 
eating practices. Last but not least, I would like to take 
this opportunity to congratulate and convey my gratitude 
to those who were involved in the review of the 
document, particularly the Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 
Technical Working Group members. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
YBhg. Tan Sri Dato’ Seri Dr. Noor Hisham Abdullah 
Director-General of Health, Malaysia 
Ministry of Health Malaysia 
Foreword by
Director-General of Health
VIII Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Preface by
Deputy Director-General of 
Health Malaysia (Public Health) 
Malaysia
S
ince the past decades, Malaysia has been 
experiencing nutrition transition and lifestyle 
changes. These include a change from a 
traditional to a more 'westernized' or global diet and 
lifestyle. The National Health and Morbidity Survey 
(NHMS 2019) showed that about half of the adults 
population in Malaysia were obese, with 30.4% and 
19.7% being overweight and obese, respectively. There 
was also an increase of other diet related non-
communicable diseases such as diabetes and 
hypercholesterolemia. This situation is aggravated by the 
Covid-19 pandemic which has imposed a significant 
economic burden on individuals, families, and nations. 
 
Therefore, the revised Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 
2020 focuses on adults which were developed based on 
the recommended nutrient intake (RNI, 2017), the latest 
nutritional status and scientific evidence. In the Malaysian 
Dietary Guidelines 2020, all the 14 key messages, key 
recommendations and how to achieve were written by a 
group of nutrition experts to ensure appropriate and 
meaningful recommendations and achievable to be 
practiced. 
 
I do hope that these guidelines would be a valuable 
resource for health care, personnel, academicians, non-
government organisations and other stakeholders in 
disseminating appropriate nutrition messages. Finally, I 
would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to all those 
who have been involved in the completion of this 
Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Datuk Dr. Chong Chee Kheong 
Deputy Director General Of Health (Public Health) 
Ministry of Health Malaysia
IXMalaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Preface by
Chairman of Technical Working 
Group on Nutritional  
Guidelines
I
ndividuals’ dietary behavior are of primary interest to 
public health professionals, nutritionists/dietitians and 
food industry alike. The impact of what an individual 
eat on health outcomes is rarely influenced by any one 
eating event or single food. Instead, health outcomes 
related to diet are a result of complex combinations of 
foods eaten together over time. 
 
Dietary guidelines remain a useful tool in providing 
nutrition information and advice for the public that is 
credible from a scientific perspective and easy to 
understand and follow. 
 
The Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020, a revised 
version on MDG 2010 comprise of 14 Key messages with 
52 key recommendations and how to achieve, prepared 
by the Technical Working Group Nutritional Guidelines 
provide valuable information to related stakeholders to 
help individuals make healthier food choices.  
 
The Technical Working Group are hopeful that the 
guidelines will be widely used as a reference and we look 
forward for feedback from stakeholders and end users to 
help us update and improve the guidelines from time to 
time. 
 
I would like to thank members of the Technical Working 
Group, the writers, the Focus Discussion Group, the 
Editorial team, the Consensus Workshop participants, 
the TWG Secretariat and all those who assisted this 
valuable document for their hard work and dedication. 
 
 
Emeritus Prof. Dr. Mohd Ismail Noor  
FASc, FIUNS, FCFAM. 
Chairman  
Technical Working Group Nutritional Guidelines (NCCFN)
Acknowledgement
X Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
I
ndividuals from various Departments and Institutes, the Ministry of Health Malaysia, 
academicians from local universities, nutritionists, dietitians, representatives from related 
professional bodies, representatives from the food manufacturing and trading industry, 
and consumer bodies are all acknowledged by the 
Technical Working Group on Nutritional 
Guidelines. Their invaluable contributions and dedication to completing this document 
successfully are sincerely appreciated.  
 
A word of gratitude is also conveyed to the: 
 
• Director of National Institutes of Health 
•
Director of Disease Control Division 
• Director of Food Safety and Quality Division 
• Directors of State Department of Health (all over Malaysia) 
• Dean of Allied Health Sciences Faculty, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
• Dean of Health Sciences Faculty, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
• Dean of Education Faculty, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
• Dean of Medical and Health Science Faculty, Universiti Putra Malaysia 
• Dean of Sports Science and Recreation Faculty, Universiti Teknologi MARA 
• Dean of Health Science Faculty, Universiti Teknologi MARA 
• Dean of Applied Science Faculty, Universiti Teknologi MARA 
• Dean of Health Science Faculty, Universiti Sultan Zainal Abidin 
• Dean of Allied Health Sciences Faculty, Universiti Sains Malaysia 
• Dean of Health Sciences Faculty, Universiti Sains Malaysia 
• Dean of Food Science and Nutrition School, Universiti Malaysia Sabah 
• Dean of Medical and Health Science Faculty, Universiti Malaysia Sarawak 
• Dean of Kuliyyah of Allied-Health Sciences, International Islamic University Malaysia 
• Dean of Applied Science Faculty, UCSI University 
• Director of Bioscience School, Taylor's University Lakeside Campus  
• Dean of Medical and Health Sciences, International Medical University  
• President of Nutrition Society of Malaysia 
 
for their generous support and cooperation.  
XIMalaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Technical Working Group on Nutritional Guidelines
1. Emeritus Prof. Dr. Mohd Ismail Noor (Chairman) Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
 
2. Ms. Rusidah Selamat (Vice Chairman) Nutrition Division 
Ministry of Health Malaysia 
 
3. Ms. Rozalina Ismail (Secretary) Nutrition Division 
Ministry of Health Malaysia 
 
4. Ms. Khairul Zarina Mohd Yusop Nutrition Division 
Ministry of Health Malaysia 
 
5. Ms. Norhidayah Othman (until 2020) Food Safety and Quality 
Ministry of Health Malaysia 
 
6. Dr. Vanita Subramaniam (until 2020) Health Education Division 
Ministry of Health Malaysia 
 
7. Ms. Jamilah Ahmad Melaka State Health Department 
Ministry of Health Malaysia 
 
8. Prof. Dr. Norimah A Karim International Medical University 
 
9. Prof. Dr. Winnie Chee Siew Swee International Medical University    
 
10. Prof. Dr Poh Bee Koon Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
 
11. Prof. Dr. Chan Yoke Mun Universiti Putra Malaysia  
 
12. Prof. Dr. Hamid Jan Jan Mohamad (until 2020) Universiti Sains Malaysia 
 
13. Prof. Madya Dr Mahenderan Appukutty Universiti Teknologi MARA 
 
14. Dr. Yasmin Ooi Beng Houi Universiti Malaysia Sabah 
 
15. Dr. Tee E Siong Nutrition Society of Malaysia 
 
16. Dr. Zaitun Md Yassin Nutrition Society of Malaysia 
 
17. Dr. Marhazlina bt Mohamad (started 2021) Universiti Sultan Zainal Abidin  
 
18. Dr. Siti Raihanah bt Shafie (started 2021) Universiti Putra Malaysia 
 
19. Dr. Mohd Hanif b. Zailani (started 2021) Disease Control Division 
Ministry of Health Malaysia
XII Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
List of Authors 
Key Message 1 : Eat a variety of foods within the recommended servings
1. Prof. Dr. Norimah A. Karim (Key writer) Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
2. Dr. Sameeha Mohd Jamil Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
3. Prof. Dr. Chan Yoke Mun Universiti Putra Malaysia 
4. Asst. Prof. Dr. Nor Azwani Mohd Shukri Universiti Islam Antarabangsa Malaysia 
5. Ms. Rohida Salleh Hudin Kedah State Health Department 
6. Ms. Rusidah Selamat Ministry of Health Malaysia 
7. Ms. Teh Wai Siew Ministry of Health Malaysia 
8. Ms. Khairul Zarina Mohd Yusop Ministry of Health Malaysia 
9. Emeritus Prof. Dr. Mohd Ismail Noor Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Key Message 2 : Achieve and maintain a healthy body weight
1. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Mahenderan Appukutty (Key writer) Universiti Teknologi MARA 
2. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Chin Yit Siew Universiti Putra Malaysia 
3. Dr. Roseline Yap Wai Kuan Nutrition Society of Malaysia 
4. Assist. Prof. Dr. Serene Tung En Hui UCSI University 
5. Ms. Noor Faezah Abdul Jalil Ministry of Health Malaysia 
6. Emeritus Prof. Dr. Mohd Ismail Noor Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
Key Message 3 : Be physically active every day
1. Prof. Dr. Poh Bee Koon (Key writer) Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
2. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Hazizi Abu Saad Universiti Putra Malaysia 
3. Dr. Denise Koh Choon Lian Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
4. Dr. Wee Bee Suan Universiti Sultan Zainal Abidin 
5. Ms. Inin Roslyza Rosli Ministry of Health Malaysia 
6. Ms. Rosne Rafidah Abd Rani Ministry of Health Malaysia 
XIIIMalaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
List of Authors 
Key Message 4 : Cook nutritious foods at home more often and choose 
healthier options when eating out
1. Prof. Dr. Winnie Chee Siew Swee (Key writer) International Medical University 
2. Dr. Yang Wai Yew International Medical University 
3. Ms. Siti Shuhailah Shaikh Abd Rahim Ministry of Health Malaysia 
4. Ms. Ruhaya Salleh Ministry of Health Malaysia 
Key Message 6 : Eat adequate amounts of rice, other cereals, whole grain 
cereal-based products and tubers 
1. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Nik Shanita Safii (Key writer) Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
2. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Barakatun Nisak Mohd Yusof Universiti Putra Malaysia 
3. Dr. Wong Jyh Eiin Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
4. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Wan Azdie Mohd Abu Bakar Universiti Islam Antarabangsa Malaysia 
5. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Sharifah Wajihah Wafa Syed Universiti Sultan Zainal Abidin 
Saadun Tarek Wafa  
6. Mr. Khairul Hasnan Amali Selangor State Health Department 
Key Message 7 : Consume moderate amounts of fish, meat, poultry, egg, 
legumes and nuts
1. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Cheah Whye Lian (Key writer) Universiti Malaysia Sarawak 
2. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Chin Yit Siew Universiti Putra Malaysia 
3. Dr. Megan Chong Hueh Zan International Medical University 
4. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Geeta Appannah Universiti Putra Malaysia 
5. Ms. Siti Adibah Ab. Halim Ministry of Health Malaysia
Key Message 5 : Eat plenty of vegetables and fruits everyday
1. Dr. Yasmin B.H. Ooi (Key writer) Universiti Malaysia Sabah 
2. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Aryati Ahmad Universiti Sultan Zainal Abidin 
3. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Foo Leng Huat Universiti Sains Malaysia 
4. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Gan Wan Ying Universiti Putra Malaysia 
5. Ms. Aznita Izma Mohd Arif Ministry of Health Malaysia 
List of Authors 
Key Message 8 : Consume adequate amounts of milk and milk products
1. Prof. Dr. Hamid Jan Jan Mohamed (Key writer) Universiti Sains Malaysia 
2. Assist. Prof. Dr. Satvinder Kaur UCSI University 
3. Prof. Dr. Winnie Chee Siew Swee International Medical University 
4. Ms. Nur Shafawati Mohd Ghazali Ministry of Health Malaysia
Key Message 9 : Reduce intake of foods high in fat and limit saturated fat intake
1. Prof. Dr. Tilakavati Karupaiah (Key writer) Taylor’s University 
2. Dr. Khor Ban Hock Universiti Malaysia Sabah 
3. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Mohd Razif Shahril Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
4. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Zulfitri Azuan Mat Daud Universiti Putra Malaysia 
5. Dr. Shanthi Krishnasamy Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
6. Ms. Nur Amalina Muhamad Ministry of Health Malaysia 
Key Message 10 : Choose and prepare foods with less salt, sauces and flavour 
enhancers
1. Prof. Dr. Suzana Shahar (Key writer) Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
2. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Zahara Abdul Manaf Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
3. Ms. Viola Michael Ministry of Health Malaysia 
4. Ms. Ainan Nasrina Ismail Ministry of Health Malaysia 
Key Message 11 : Limit sugar intake in foods and beverages
1. Prof. Dr. Ruzita Abd. Talib (Key writer) Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
2. Assist. Prof. Dr. Hanapi Mat Jusoh Universiti Islam Antarabangsa Malaysia 
3. Dr. Siti Sabariah Buhari Universiti Teknologi MARA 
4. Ms. Tan Yen Nee Ministry of Health Malaysia
Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 XIV
Key Message 12 : Drink plenty of water daily
1. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Loh Su Peng (Key writer) Universiti Putra Malaysia 
2. Dr. Nor Baizura Md.Yusop Universiti Putra Malaysia 
3. Dr. Razali Mohamed Salleh Universiti Teknologi MARA 
4. Dr. Zaitun Yassin Nutrition Society of Malaysia 
5. Ms. Norashikin Ramlan Ministry of Health Malaysia 
Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 XV
List of Authors 
Key Message 13 : Consume safe and clean foods and beverages
1. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Hasnah Haron (Key writer) Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
2. Dr. Nurul Huda Razalli Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
3. Dr. Fadhilah Jailani Universiti Teknologi MARA 
4. Ms. Norhidayah Othman Ministry of Health Malaysia 
Key Message 14 : Make effective use of nutrition information on food labels
1. Dr. Tee E Siong (Key writer) Nutrition Society of Malaysia 
2. Ms. Fatimah Sulong Ministry of Health Malaysia 
3. Ms. Maizatul Azlina Chee Yin Ministry of Health Malaysia 
4. Mr. Leong Han Yin Ministry of Health Malaysia 
XVI Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Editorial Board Members
1. Emeritus. Prof. Mohd Ismail Noor (Chief Editor) Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
2. Prof. Dr. Norimah A. Karim Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
3. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Mahenderan Appukutty Universiti Teknologi MARA 
4. Prof. Dr. Poh Bee Koon Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
5. Prof. Dr. Winnie Chee Siew Swee International Medical University 
6. Dr. Yasmin B.H. Ooi Universiti Malaysia Sabah 
7. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Nik Shanita Safii Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
8. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Cheah Whye Lian Universiti Malaysia Sarawak 
9. Prof. Dr. Hamid Jan Jan Mohamed Universiti Sains Malaysia 
10. Prof. Dr. Tilakavati Karupaiah Taylor’s University 
11. Prof. Dr. Suzana Shahar Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
12. Prof. Dr. Ruzita Abd.Talib Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
13. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Loh Su Peng Universiti Putra Malaysia 
14. Assoc. Prof. Dr. Hasnah Haron Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
15. Dr. Tee E Siong Nutrition Society of Malaysia
XVIIMalaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Coordination and Documentation
The documentation of the Malaysian Dietary Guidelines (MDG) 2020 was coordinated by the Technical 
Working Group (TWG) on Nutritional Guidelines, which is under the purview of the National Coordinating 
Committee on Food and Nutrition (NCCFN), Ministry of Health Malaysia. The Nutrition Division, Ministry 
of Health Malaysia served as the secretariat for the MDG 2020. 
 
Chairperson, TWG on Nutritional Guidelines Emeritus Prof. Dr. Mohd Ismail Noor 
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
 
 
Secretariat Ms. Rusidah Selamat (Vice Chairman) MOH  
Ms. Rozalina Ismail (Secretary), MOH 
Ms. Khairul Zarina, MOH 
Ms. Wong Chee Yen, MOH 
Ms. Siti Fatimah Mohd Tarmizi, MOH 
 
XVIII Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Key message 1 Table 1.1 : Recommended number of servings for each 10  
food group based on 1500 kcal, 1800 kcal  
and 2000 kcal per day 
 
Table 1.2 : Example of common foods (per serving) in 11  
household measurement for intake of  
1800 kcal per day 
 
Table 1.3 : Examples of vegetables equivalent to one serving 18  
 
Table 1.4 : Examples of fruits equivalent to one serving 19  
 
Table 1.5 : Examples of rice, other cereals, whole grain 19 
cereal-based products and tubers equivalent  
to one serving  
 
T
able 1.6 : Examples of legumes, nuts and seeds equivalent 21 
to one serving  
 
T
able 1.7 : Examples of fish and seafood equivalent to one 22 
serving  
 
T
able 1.8 : Examples of poultry, meat and egg equivalent to 22 
one serving  
 
T
able 1.9 : Examples of milk & milk products equivalent to 23  
one serving  
 
T
able 1.10 : Example of one day menu and serving size of 27 
each food group for 1500 kcal  
 
T
able 1.11 : Example of one day menu and serving size of 28 
food group for 1800 kcal  
 
T
able 1.12 : Example of one day menu and serving size of 29 
food group for 2000 kcal  
 
Figure 1.1
: Malaysian Food Pyramid 2020 9 
 
Figure 1.2 : Malaysian Healthy Plate 12  
 
Figure 1.3 : Standard measurements used in this dietary 23 
guideline  
 
Figure 1.4
: How to plan and take your main meal using the 24 - 26 
Malaysian Healthy Plate  
 
 
Key message 2 T
able 2.1 : Body weight classification of adults according to 38 
BMI and public health action for Malaysia 
 
Table 2.2 : Waist circumference cut-off points 39  
 
List of Tables, Figures and Appendices
XIXMalaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Table 2.3 : Basal metabolic rate (MJ/day), total daily energy 54 
expenditure (MJ/day) and Physical Activity  
Level (P
AL) of Malaysian 
 
Table 2.4 : Examples of high calorie or energy-dense foods 54 
and lower calorie choices  
 
T
able 2.5 : Benefits of weight loss on health risks in obesity 55  
 
Figure 2.1 : Tackling Obesities: Future Choices, 36  
Foresight Report  
 
Figure 2.2
: Relationships between Body Mass Index (BMI) 37 
and mortality  
 
Figure 2.3
: A model showing the relation of obesity in the 37 
centre and the diseases with which it is associated 
 
Figure 2.4 : Therapeutic effects of weight loss on metabolic 42 
function  
 
Figure 2.5
: Prevalence of overweight and obesity in Malaysian 45 
adults based on NHMS 1996, 2006, 2011, 2015,  
and 2019 
 
 
Key message 3 T
able 3.1 : Examples of moderate and vigorous activities 76 - 78 
defined by level of intensity  
 
T
able 3.2 : Examples of flexibility and strength training 79 
activities defined by level of intensity  
 
T
able 3.3 : Examples of weekly physical activity plans for 80  
various population groups 
 
Figure 3.1 : Physical Activity Pyramid 67  
 
 
Key message 4 Figure 4.1
: Conceptual model of healthy cooking: 84 
Scheme depicting the conceptual framework and  
the constructs that define healthy cooking in  
relation to chronic disease. 
 
 
Key message 6 Figure 6.1
: U-shaped association between the percentage 111 
of energy from carbohydrate and all-cause  
mortality in ARIC and PURE cohort studies 
 
 
Key message 7 T
able 7.1 : Nutrition comparison of 85 gram servings of 122 
different types of shellfish  
 
 
List of Tables, Figures and Appendices
XX Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Key message 9 Table 9.1 : Fatty acid composition of selected dietary fats 149 
and oils  
 
T
able 9.2 : Malaysian foods with significant content of 150 - 151 
dietary fat (g/100g)  
 
Table 9.3
: Marine omega-3 fatty acid content in Malaysian 152  
fishes  
 
Figure 9.1
: Cholesterol content of common foods 153 
 
 
Key message 10 Table 10.1 : Dietary reference intakes of sodium for adults 163  
 
Table 10.2 : Sources and content of sodium in selected foods 172 - 175 
 
 
Key message 11 Table 11.1 : Percentage and mean intake of top ten 184 
beverages consumed daily among Malaysian  
adult population 
 
Table 11.2 : Total sugar contents in selected local kuih 190  
 
T
able 11.3 : Total sugar contents in selected local cooked 191 
dishes  
 
T
able 11.4 : Total sugar contents in selected cereal, starchy 191 - 192 
& tuber, legume, nut & seed and other processed  
products 
 
T
able 11.5 : Total sugar contents in selected sugar & syrup 193 
products and beverages  
 
T
able 11.6 : Total sugar contents in selected fruits 194 
 
Figure 11.1 : Per capita consumption of sugar (kg-raw value) 183  
in Asian countries  
 
Figure 1
1.2 : World centrifugal sugar: Human domestic 183 
consumption (1,000 metric tonnes, raw value) 
 
 
Key message 12 Table 12.1 : Calculation of water requirement according to 201 
RNI for adults  
 
Figure 12.1
: Variables that are regulated as part of body 197 
water homeostasis.  
 
Figure 12.2
: Water needs estimated from sweat loss 198 
predictions due to changes in physical activity  
and air temperature. 
List of Tables, Figures and Appendices
XXIMalaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Key message 13 Table 13.1 : Definition of each food borne disease 207 
 
Table 13.2 : Enforcement of Prevention and Control of 213 
Infectious Diseases Act, 1988  
 
Figure 13.1
: Trend of incidence of typhoid, cholera, 211 
hepatitis A
 and dysentery  
in Malaysia (2011 to 2017)  
 
Figure 13.2 : Trend total episode and incidence rate of food 212  
poisoning in Malaysia (2011 to 2017)  
 
Figure 13.3
: Five keys to safer food 220  
 
Figure 13.4 : 7 steps of appropriate hand washing 221 
 
 
Key message 14 Table 14.1 : An example of Nutrition Information Panel (NIP) 227 
with only mandatory nutrients  
 
T
able 14.2 : An example of Nutrition Information Panel (NIP) 228 
with optional nutrients  
 
T
able 14.3 : Foods requiring mandatory nutrition labelling 241 - 242  
 
Table 14.4 : Permitted nutrient content claims and the 245 - 246 
conditions to carry the claims on labels  
 
T
able 14.5 : Permitted nutrient function claims 247 - 248  
 
Table 14.6 : Permitted other function claims 249 - 255 
 
Table 14.7 : Conditions for claims related to addition of 256 
nutrients or other food components  
 
Figure 14.1
: An example of Nutrition Information Panel (NIP) 231 
of Energy Icon  
 
Figure 14.2
: Healthier Choice Logo (HCL) Logo 232 
 
Figure 14.3 : Nutrition information on food label 240 
 
Figure 14.4 : Component of Nutrition Information Panel (NIP) 243  
 
Figure 14.5 : Guide to use of Nutrition Information Panel (NIP) 244 
to compare nutrient content of different brands
List of Tables, Figures and Appendices
MALAYSIAN
DIETARY
GUIDELINES
2020
EXECUTIVESUMMARY
Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 XXII
M
alaysian Dietary 
Guidelines (MDGs) are 
government endorsed 
documents intended to provide 
specific recommendations and 
advice on healthy diets and 
lifestyles. They are intended to 
influence consumer food choice 
based on latest scientific findings 
on food and nutrient intakes, food 
supplies, prevalence and public 
health importance of diet-related 
health and nutrition outcomes, 
cultural preferences, and other 
considerations. It forms the basis 
for educational programmes and 
the national food and nutrition 
policies. The challenge for any 
dietary guidelines would be to 
have a coherent policy that take 
into consideration not only the 
healthy dietary choices and 
personal health but also the wider 
social and environmental impact 
towards achieving a global 
environmental sustainability.  
The first Malaysian Dietary Guidelines was published in 
1999 and revised in 2010. Over the last decade, our 
population continues to face the double burden of 
malnutrition by the coexistence of undernutrition 
problems (e.g. anaemia, stunting and wasting) along with 
overweight, obesity and diet-related non-communicable 
diseases (e.g. hypertension, diabetes mellitus, 
cardiovascular diseases and certain forms of cancers). 
The recent NHMS (2019) revealed 50% (1 in 2) of adult 
population are either overweight or obese. It has been 
shown that the traditional diets have been replaced by 
diets higher in fats, salt, sugar and low fiber as well as 
increase in sugar-sweetened beverages consumption; 
lower intakes of vegetables and fruits as well as higher 
weekly frequency of eating out. Therefore, the need to 
review and update the MDG 2010 in line with the latest 
review of Recommended Nutrient Intakes (RNI), 2017 
was undertaken by the 
Technical Working Group for 
Nutritional Guidelines under the auspices of the National 
Coordinating Committee for Food and Nutrition (NCCFN), 
Ministry of Health Malaysia.  
 
The MDG 2020 is written by a group of experts from the 
academia, Ministry of Health Malaysia and related 
professional bodies who have extensive knowledge of 
Nutrition and Health Science. Several drafts were 
reviewed, validated and approved by the TWG Nutritional 
Guidelines. The Key Messages, Key Recommendations 
and how to achieve were then vetted through Focus 
Group Discussion on 5-7 February 2020 comprising of 
Public Health personal (end-users) to determine the 
relevance and clarity of the statements. The final draft 
was then presented in a 3-day Consensus Workshop on 
22-24 July 2020 involving relevant stakeholders from 
various Ministries, Government Agencies, Academia, 
Professional bodies, Industries and Consumer 
Associations for revision and approval. 
 
The Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 are intended for 
health professionals, policy makers, educators, food 
manufacturers, and researchers. It applies to all healthy 
adult Malaysians, as well as those with common health 
conditions such as being overweight. They do not apply 
to people who need special dietary advice for a medical 
condition. 
XXIIIMalaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
The revised MDG 2020 features 
some of the following key 
updates:
 
 
• The MDG use the Recommended Nutrient Intakes for Malaysia 
(2017) that provide nutrient intake requirements for adults and 
suggested individual foods from various food groups that can be 
combined within diets to meet these requirements.  
 
• The MDG 2020 is based on foods that are available, accessible 
and culturally appropriate for the population. These are used to 
construct recommended diet patterns that meet nutrient intake 
requirements and address our nutrition concerns including the 
excessive consumption of ultra-processed foods and drinks. 
 
• It is primarily designed for adults population aged 18-59 years old.  
 
• However, the Malaysian Food Pyramid 2020 is not just targeted 
for adults but it can be a reference of daily food intakes for the 
healthy population starting at the age of 7 and above. The 
recommended servings of each food group in the food pyramid is 
within a calorie range of 1500 – 2300 kcal. 
 
• The Malaysian Food Pyramid 2020, maintained the five food 
groups which are placed at four levels however, it differs from the 
previous MDGs, in which, vegetables and fruits groups form the 
base of the new pyramid replacing the Carbohydrate food group. 
It is reconstructed taking into consideration the number of 
servings contributed by vegetables and fruits which constitute the 
most as compared to other food groups. Pictorial representation 
of the food pyramid has been improved to appreciate the relative 
portion size of each food group. 
 
• The introduction of Malaysian Healthy Plate helps complement 
the Food Pyramid and guide users to create a healthy balanced 
meal.  
 
• The 14 Key messages in the MDG 2020 are quite similar to the 
2010 version however, each key message in the Malaysian 
Dietary Guidelines (MDG) 2020 have been revised and updated 
with recent scientific evidence. 
 
• In view of a very high prevalence of “eating out” among adults, a 
new key message “Cook Nutritious Food at Home More Often 
and Choose Healthier Options When Eating Out” has been 
introduced to replace key message on “Breastfeeding” found in 
MDG 2010.  
 
• The Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 provide many options in 
their recommendations. The advice focuses on dietary patterns 
that promote health and wellbeing. It offers approximately 52 Key 
Recommendations and 244 statements on “how to achieve” to 
help users make informed choices toward healthier eating habits.  
KM1
KM2
KM3
KM4
KM5
KM6
KM7
KM8
KM9
KM10
KM11
KM12
KM13
KM14
Key Messages of the 
Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020
XXIV Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Eat a variety of foods within the recommended servings. 
Achieve and maintain a healthy body weight. 
Be physically active every day. 
Cook nutritious foods at home more often and choose healthier 
options when eating out. 
Eat plenty of vegetables and fruits every day. 
Eat adequate amount of rice, other cereals, whole grain cereal-based 
products and tubers. 
Consume moderate amount of fish, meat, poultry, egg, legumes 
and nuts.  
Consume adequate amounts of milk and milk products. 
Reduce intake of foods high in fat and limit saturated fat intake. 
Choose and prepare foods with less salt, sauces and flavour 
enhancers. 
Limit sugar intake in foods and beverages. 
Drink plenty of water daily. 
Consume safe and clean foods and beverages.  
Make effective use of nutrition information on food labels. 
1Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
KEY 
MESSAGE
1
Eat a variety of foods  
within the recommended 
servings
11
KEY MESSAGE
2 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
1.1 Terminology   
Adequate diet 
 
An adequate diet provides enough energy, 
nutrients and 
ﬁbre to maintain an individual’s 
health. A diet that is adequate for an individual 
may not be adequate for another. 
 
Balanced diet 
 
A balanced diet is a diet that contains a 
combination of foods that provide a proper balance 
of nutrients. The body needs many types of foods 
in varying amounts to maintain health. 
The right 
balance of nutrients needed to maintain health can 
be achieved by eating proper balance of all healthy 
foods including fruit, vegetable, cereal, ﬁsh, meat, 
legume and milk. 
 
Food groups   
 
A food group puts together foods of similar 
nutrient content and function. There are 
ﬁve food 
groups which are vegetables; fruits; rice, other 
cereals, whole grain cereal-based products and 
tubers; ﬁsh, poultry/ eggs/ meat, and legumes; 
milk and milk products. These food groups contain 
foods that are similar in calories, carbohydrate, 
protein and fat contents.    
 
Healthy diet  
 
A healthy diet is a diet which provides a proper 
combination of energy and nutrients. The four 
characteristics of a healthy diet are varied
, 
adequate, balanced and moderate.  
 
Malaysian Food Pyramid 2020 
 
A food pyramid is a visual tool that is used as a 
guide to your DAIL
Y food intake in achieving a 
healthy diet. It is developed to provide a guide for 
the types and amounts of food that can be eaten in 
combination to provide a balanced diet. A food 
pyramid consists of four levels that represent ﬁve 
food groups. The recommended number of 
servings per day for each food group is indicated 
next to it. From the bottom to the top of the food 
pyramid, the number of servings of each food 
group becomes smaller indicating that an 
individual should eat more of the foods at the base 
of the pyramid and less of the foods at the top of 
the pyramid. 
EAT A VARIETY OF FOODS 
WITHIN THE RECOMMENDED 
SERVINGS
Prof. Dr. Norimah A. Karim, Ms. Rusidah Selamat, Dr. Sameeha Mohd Jamil, Ms. Teh Wai Siew,  
Asst. Prof. Dr. Nor Azwani Mohd Shukri, Prof. Dr. Chan Yoke Mun, Ms. Rohida Salleh Hudin,  
Ms. Khairul Zarina Mohd Yusop and Emeritus Prof. Dr. Mohd Ismail Noor.
3Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Malaysian Healthy Plate 
 
Malaysian Healthy Plate (MOH, 2016) is a visual guide to 
show the total food in each food group that needs to be 
consumed in a meal to achieve a healthy and balanced 
diet based on the principle of quarter,
 quarter, half. It is 
used to translate recommendations from the Malaysian 
Dietary Guidelines and Malaysian Food Pyramid to help 
Malaysian practise healthy eating habits by planning their 
daily meal. 
  
Moderation  
 
Moderation is a key to healthy diet. Moderation refers to 
eating the right amount of foods to maintain a healthy 
weight and to optimise the body’s metabolic process. 
 
Processed Foods 
 
Edible parts of plants and animals after separation from 
nature or modiﬁ ed/preserved by minimal processes or 
modiﬁed with the addition of salt, sugar
, oils or fats to 
preserve and enhance their sensory qualities. These 
include canned or bottled vegetables or legumes (pulses) 
preserved in brine; whole fruit preserved in syrup; tinned 
ﬁsh preserved in oil; some types of processed animal 
foods such as ham, nuggets, sausage, and smoked ﬁ sh; 
most freshly baked breads; and simple cheeses to which 
salt is added (Monteiro et al., 2019).  
 
Recommended Nutrient Intakes (RNIs) 
 
Recommended nutrient intakes are nutrient standards 
that used to plan and assess dietary nutrient intakes of 
healthy individual or population. Nutrient 
recommendations in RNI are diff er with age,
 sex, and 
physical activity level.  The range of intakes encompassed 
by the RNI should be considered suffi cient to prevent 
deﬁciency, maintain optimal health while avoiding 
toxicity (NCCFN, 2017)  
 
Serving size 
 
In the Malaysian Food Pyramid, serving size is the 
recommended amount of foods consumed daily in 
household measures used for foods and drinks, for 
example cup,
 plate, bowl, tablespoon, teaspoon and glass. 
However, serving size deﬁ ned in the Malaysian Food 
Pyramid may not be equal to a serving size deﬁned in a 
food label.  
Unprocessed and minimal processed foods 
 
Unprocessed (or natural) foods are the edible parts of 
plants (such as fruit,  leaves,
 stems, seeds, roots) or from 
animals (such as muscle, offal, eggs, milk), and also fungi, 
algae and water, after separation from nature. Whilst, 
minimally processed foods are natural foods altered by 
methods that include removal of inedible or unwanted 
parts, and also processes that include drying, crushing, 
grinding, powdering, fractioning, ﬁltering, roasting, boiling, 
non-alcoholic fermentation, pasteurization, chilling, 
freezing, placing in containers, and vacuum packaging. 
Unprocessed and minimally processed foods vary in 
energy density and in their content and balance of fats, 
carbohydrates, proteins, and their fractions, and in 
vitamins, minerals and other bioactive compounds. 
(Monteiro et al., 2019b; Lane et al, 2020). 
 
Ultra-Processed Foods (UPFs) 
 
Ultra-processed foods are characterised by NOV
A as 
industrial formulations generated through compounds 
extracted, derived or synthesized from food or food 
substrates. Ultra-processed foods also commonly contain 
artiﬁcial substances such as colours, sweeteners, ﬂavours, 
preservatives, thickeners, emulsiﬁers and other additives 
used to promote aesthetics, enhance palatability and 
increase shelf life. Ready to eat food and beverage, 
spreads, packaged snacks and pastries, cakes, instant 
noodles, pre-prepared ready to heat products are some 
examples of ultra-processed foods high in sugar, salt, fat 
and artiﬁcial substances (Monteiro et al., 2019b; Lane et al, 
2020). 
 
Variety  
 
Variety refers to eating many different types of foods each 
day and to ensure better selection of healthier foods. By 
selecting a variety of foods, the chances of consuming the 
multitude of nutrients the body needs are optimised. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
1.2 Introduction 
A healthy diet is important to supply nutrients, reduce risk 
and to manage certain diseases. Healthy and balanced 
eating habits provide energy and nutrients required by 
the body. The Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2010, 
suggested three important considerations when planning 
healthy meals, speci ﬁcally, (i) eating a balanced diet (ii) 
consume a wide variety of foods and (iii) consume foods 
in moderation (NCCFN, 2010). These recommendations 
have also been suggested by other dietary guideline from 
various countries such as USA (USDA, 2015), and Australia 
(NHMRC, 2013). 
 
The accelerated phase of urbanisation and food 
industrialisation in recent decades has inevitably brought 
changes in the Malaysian dietary habits (NCCFN 2017). 
A major shift can be seen in the availability, accessibility, 
affordability of processed and convenient foods which 
inﬂuenced the consumer’s food preferences and choices. 
The dietary changes towards affl uent and convenient 
processed foods have been associated with the 
increasing prevalence of obesity irrespective of age, 
ethnic and social status. The adoption of Malaysian Food 
Pyramid 2020 recommendation in daily diet would beneﬁt 
increasing consumption of freshly prepared dishes made 
from unprocessed or minimally processed foods and 
reducing consumption of processed foods especially 
ultra-processed foods and beverages. NOVA classiﬁcation 
is one of the superlative techniques recognized by the 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
and the Pan American Health Organization as a valid tool 
to observe ultra-processed food (UPP) consumption FAO 
(2019). 
 
It is very important that an individual ensures getting 
appropriate foods and incorporates the principle of good 
nutrition such as variety, a balanced intake of nutrients 
and in moderation. To ensure varieties in the daily diet, 
an individual is required to eat diff erent types of foods 
within each level of food pyramid. This will enhance and 
optimise the nutrient needs of the body. In addition, 
eating food within the recommended number of servings 
is crucial. Thus, the recommendations from the Malaysian 
Food Pyramid are translated into practice using the 
Malaysian Healthy Plate which guides us to plan our main 
meals. The Malaysian Healthy Plate (MOH, 2016) 
incorporates the principles of quarter, quarter, half. To 
estimate food portion, a 10-inch (25 cm) plate is used. It is 
recommended that the ﬁ rst quarter of the plate is ﬁ lled 
with either rice, noodles, breads, grains, cereal products 
or tubers. This is followed by ﬁlling the second quarter of 
the plate with either ﬁsh, poultry, meat or legumes. The 
other half of your plate should be ﬁ lled with vegetables 
and fruits. It however does not re ﬂect the daily calories 
intake and serving sizes for each food group. In addition, 
plain water or unsweetened beverages, milk or dairy 
products should be consumed with the meal. Water is 
essential for many body functions for example regulating 
body temperature and digestion. 
 
The MDG 2010 is revised and updated taking into 
consideration the many studies reporting the changes in 
food consumption patterns and dietary habits of 
Malaysians as well as nutritional and health related 
problems in Malaysia (IPH, 2014; Ahmad Ali et al., 2019a; 
Ahmad Ali et al., 2019b; Balasubramanian et al., 2020; IPH, 
2020). The recent national prevalence of overweight and 
obesity as reported in the NHMS 2019 was 50.1% (IPH, 
2020). The prevalence was the highest among women 
(54.7%), Indians (63.9%) and the 55-59 years old age group 
(60.9%). Similarly, abdominal obesity was present in 50% 
of adults, again highest among women (64.8%) and 
Indians (68.3%). It has been shown that the traditional 
diets have been replaced by diets higher in fats, salt and 
sugar-sweetened beverages; usually with lower intakes 
of fresh fruits and vegetables as well as higher weekly 
frequency of eating out (Balasubramanian et al., 2020). In 
an earlier study, Fournier et al. (2016) reported about 64% 
of Malaysians had at least one meal per day outside of 
home, 23.4% had meals at home, and 12.5% will eat at 
home with outside food. Thus, it is very important that 
this revised MDG 2020 addresses these emerging dietary 
issues and diet-related health problems to guide 
Malaysian to eat a variety of foods within the 
recommended servings.  
5Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
1.3 Scientiﬁc basis 
1.3.1 Food groups 
 
A healthy and balanced diet should include a variety of 
choices from each of the following ﬁ ve food groups, 
namely vegetables; fruits; rice
, other cereals, whole grain 
cereal-based products and tubers; ﬁ sh, poultry/ eggs/ 
meat, and legumes; milk and milk products. Each of these 
food groups provides an array of nutrients, and the 
amounts recommended that promote positive health 
outcomes. The WHO (2003) suggested the consumption 
of a variety of foods from diff erent food groups, with 
emphasis on plant-based foods. Consuming foods from 
each group in the appropriate amount each day allows 
the individual to achieve the requirements for energy, 
carbohydrates, proteins, and fats as well as vitamins and 
minerals. In addition to the essential nutrients, di fferent 
foods also provide ﬁ bre and phytochemicals (found in 
plants), many of which are protective against diseases. 
Some of these compounds act as antioxidants, which 
protect the body’s cells from being damaged. Eating a 
variety of foods also keeps our meals interesting and full 
of ﬂavour (McCrory et al., 2012; NHMRC, 2013). The 
following sections describe the food groups in general 
and highlight nutrients for which the food group is a key 
contributor.  
 
In this revised MDG 2020, the food groups are still placed 
in the four levels of the Malaysian Food Pyramid. The 
Malaysian RNI (NCCFN, 2017) recommends that 
carbohydrate, protein and fat contribute to 50-65%, 10-
20% and 25%-35% of the total caloric intake per day. This 
recommendation is used to calculate the number of 
servings to be consumed per day for each food group. The 
Malaysian Food Pyramid 2020 is reconstructed taking into 
consideration the number of servings contributed by 
vegetables and fruits which constitute the most as 
compared to other food groups.  
 
There are many types of vegetable that are often classiﬁed 
based on their edible part mainly leaves, stems, roots, 
ﬂowers and fruits vegetable. Vegetables are low in fat and 
carbohydrate but high in vitamins, minerals and ﬁ bers. 
Consumption of a variety of vegetables contributes an 
array of nutrients. For example, green leafy vegetables 
such as spinach (bayam), mustard green (sawi), and 
swamp cabbage (kangkung) are generally high in folate, 
vitamin K and potassium, while red and orange 
vegetables (i.e., carrots, tomatoes, pumpkins) provide the 
most vitamin A. Vegetables are a good source of dietary 
ﬁbers and it can prevent constipation. Vegetable should 
be eaten either raw or cooked instead of as juices to 
optimise its health beneﬁts. While it is best to cook certain 
vegetables to make them more palatable and increase the 
availability of the nutrients (Colle et al, 2010), with 
minimal cooking process as well as minimal use of 
cooking oil or coconut milk (santan). 
 
Together with vegetables, fruits are now placed at the 
base of the Malaysian Food Pyramid 2020. Fruits generally 
taste sweet, juicy and most of fruits areeaten fresh and 
raw. Fruits are excellent source of vitamins, minerals, 
ﬁbers which rich in antioxidants including ﬂ avonoids, 
polyphenols and etc. Consumption of adequate fruits in a 
daily diet will improve immune system, prevent 
constipation and other chronic diseases. Most of fruits are 
low in fat, sodium, calorie and high in potassium. It is 
advised to eat fruits in the whole form, although it can be 
taken in the form of fruit juice (without added sugar) limit 
to once a day. Processing of fruits into juices lower fruit 
juice can be part of healthy eating patterns, processing of 
fruits into juiceslower its dietary ﬁ bre content and can 
spikes blood glucose level. Fruit juice drink and fruit drink 
products sold in the market are considered to be sugar-
sweetened beverages rather than fruit juice because they 
are primarily composed of water with added sugars. More 
information on vegetables and fruits can be found in Key 
Message 5. 
 
Cereal especially rice is the staples for Malaysian. The 
Malaysian Food Pyramid 2020 is differs from the previous 
food pyramid, in which, vegetables and fruits groups form 
the base of the new pyramid replacing the carbohydrate 
food groups. Nevertheless, rice remain as staple food for 
Malaysian. It is recommended to consume at least half 
from the total serving size of the cereal and cereal-based 
products in form of whole grains. Wholegrains (e.g., brown 
rice, oats, barley, quinoa) contain the entire 
kernel,including the endosperm, bran, and germ. Reﬁned 
grains differ from wholegrains in that the bran and germ 
are removed, whereby essential components such as 
dietary ﬁbre, iron, vitamin Bs and other nutrients are 
minimally retained. A higher intake of wholegrains are 
associated with lowered risk of non-communicable 
diseases (NCDs) (Reynolds et. 2019). The intake of reﬁned 
grains and products especially those high in saturated 
fats,sugars, and salt, such as cakes,crackers, and creme-
ﬁlled biscuits and buns should be limited. More 
information on grains and cereal products can be found in 
Key Message 6. 
 
6 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Lean meats, ﬁ sh, poultry, eggs and plant-based 
alternatives such as tauhu, legumes, nuts and seeds are 
protein foods. This is placed in the third level of the 
Malaysian Food Pyramid 2020.  Besides protein, this food 
group provides a wide variety of other nutrients including 
iron, zinc, iodine, phosphorus, B vitamins (e.g., niacin, 
cobalamin, pyridoxine, and riboﬂavin), and essential fatty 
acids (omega 3 polyunsaturated fatty acids) among 
others. As in other food groups, each of the protein foods 
may provide different nutrients. For example, red meats 
are good sources of heme iron, which is more bioavailable 
than the non-heme iron found in plant sources. Fish and 
shellﬁsh such as prawns provide more cobalamin and 
vitamin D, and essential fatty acids namely 
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid 
(DHA). Similar with previous recommendation of daily 
protein intake, ﬁ sh should be consumed everyday. In 
addition, the Malaysian Food Pyramid 2020 also 
recommended a serving of legumes daily.Legumes 
include peas, beans, lentils, and peanuts are rich sources 
of plant protein which contained phytosterols and dietary 
ﬁbre (Trinidad et al., 2010). 
 
Nuts and seeds are highly nutritious and are of prime 
importance for people in Asia and Africa (Carlsen, 
Halvorsen & Blomhoff, 2011). Most nuts and seeds contain 
substantial amount of fat (55-70%) and protein (10-30%). 
In effort to increase intake of unsaturated fatty acids, 1 
serving of seeds is included in the calculation of total 
energy intake from fat. Besides fats, protein and vitamins, 
nuts and seeds are rich sources of phytochemicals 
including ﬂavanoids (almonds, peanuts and pistachios), 
resveratrol (peanuts and pistachios), polyphenols and 
tocopherols (walnuts) (Carlsen, Halvorsen & Blomhoff , 
2011), which may potentially reduce oxidative stress and 
risk of related diseases (Kim et al., 2019, Moghtaderi et al., 
2020). More information on protein foods including nuts 
can be found in Key Message 7. 
 
Milk and milk products, which are also placed in the third 
level of the Malaysian Food Pyramid 2020, provide a 
package of essential nutrients that is difficult to achieve in 
low-dairy or dairy-free diet (Rozenberg et al., 2016). 
Besides calcium, milk and milk products such as cheese 
and yoghurt have various health beneﬁts and are a good 
source of many nutrients, including protein, vitamin A, 
vitamin D, riboﬂavin, cobalamin, zinc, phosphorus, vitamin 
K
1, vitamin K 2 and milk fat globule phospholipids 
(Dehghan et al., 2018). Low fat or skimmed varieties of 
milk and milk products are recommended. Individuals 
who are lactose intolerant can choose low-lactose and 
lactose-free milk products. More information on milk and 
milk products can be found in Key Message 8. 
 
Fats and oils, sugars and salt are placed at the top of the 
Malaysian Food Pyramid 2020 because these foods should 
be consumed sparingly. Fats and oils, sugars and salt are 
not considered as food groups, but they are often found in 
foods. Sugars and salt improve foods palatability, however 
it can be replace or reduce by natural ﬂavour enhancer 
such as spices and herbs. Fats and oils are good sources 
for energy and essential fatty acids (arachidonic acid and 
alpha-linolenic acid). Fats also have other important 
physiological functions including fat metabolism 
generates bioactive lipid molecules, which are 
fundamental mediators of multiple signaling pathways 
(Orsavova et al., 2015). Nevertheless, in light of Malaysian 
generally being physically inactive (IPH, 2020), excessive 
fat intake (more than 35% of energy intake) may lead to 
overweight and obesity. More information on fat and oils, 
sugars and salt can be found in Key messages 9, 10 and 11 
respectively. 
 
Malaysians have betrothed extensive actions to alleviate 
the upsurge in obesity prevalence. One of the major 
challenges to curb obesity in Malaysia is due to abundant 
supplies of unhealthy foods and beverages products in 
the market. The over-reliance on processed foods, 
especially ultra-processed foods which high in energy, 
sugar, fat, salt and generally in combination with artiﬁcial 
substances such as ﬂ avour enhancers, colours, 
emulsiﬁers, and other additives to prolong shelf-life of the 
product (FAO, 2019). For instance, ready to eat food and 
beverages such as carbonated drinks, sweet or savoury 
snacks, chocolate, candies, ice-cream, mass-produced 
packaged breads and buns, spreads, cream ﬁlled biscuits, 
pastries, cakes including pre-prepared ready-to-heat 
products such as frozen currypuff, pasta and pizza dishes. 
It is gradually displacing home-prepared meals and the 
consumption of fresh fruit and vegetables in daily diets. 
Nowadays, ultra-processed foods are now often 
reformulated and advertised as if they are healthy, being 
labelled as for example ‘light’ or ‘diet’, or low in fat or 
sugar, or free from trans fats, or high in ﬁbre or vitamins 
and minerals. These adjustments may improve the 
products which however remain ultra-processed and 
unhealthy (Monteiro et al., 2019b). A systematic review 
and meta-analysis investigated the association between 
consumption of ultra-processed food and 
noncommunicable disease risk, morbidity and mortality 
demonstrated consumption of ultra-processed food was 
associated with increased risk of overweight, obesity, 
abdominal obesity, all-cause mortality, metabolic 
syndrome and depression in adults. In addition, 
consumption of ultra-processed food was associated with 
cardiometabolic diseases, frailty, irritable bowel 
syndrome, functional dyspepsia and cancer (breast and 
overall) in adults (Lane et al, 2020). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
1.3.2 Serving size 
Based on the Recommended Nutrient Intakes for 
Malaysia (NCCFN ,
 2017) and the population’s habitual 
intake (IPH,2014),  the number of servings calculated for 
the Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 is based on 50-
65% carbohydrate, 10-20% protein and 25-35% fat. The 
macronutrient contribution to the total energy intake 
(TEI) is then converted to exchange list to optimize the 
consumption of carbohydrate, protein and fat, 
subsequently converted to serving size (Shahar et al., 
2015). The number of servings for daily meal planning 
provide intakes of at least 90% of the Recommended 
Nutrient Intakes for Malaysian (RNI) for energy, 
carbohydrate, protein and fat. In MDG 2020, the number 
of servings recommended for the ﬁve food groups is based 
on 1500 kcal, 1800 kcal and 2000 kcal per day. 
 
In the revised Malaysian Food Pyramid 2020, the ﬁve food 
groups are placed at four levels. Diff erent from the 
previous MDG, vegetables and fruits group form the base 
of the new pyramid. It is reconstructed taking into 
consideration the number of servings contributed by 
fruits and vegetables which constitute the most as 
compared to other food groups. Such recommendation is 
also in line with the intention to consume more 
vegetables and fruits, considering the increasing 
prevalence of non-communicable diseases especially 
obesity and diabetes in Malaysia. The recommended 
number of servings is at least three servings or more of 
vegetables and two servings of fruits. One serving of 
vegetable is considered as zero calorie while one serving 
of fruit provides 15 g of carbohydrate and 60 kcal. In our 
main meal, the vegetables and fruits food groups should 
ﬁll up half of the Malaysian Healthy Plate (MOH, 2016).  
The second level is rice, other cereals, wholegrain cereal-
based products and tubers group. The number of servings 
recommended for this group is three to ﬁve servings per 
day, based on the energy requirement. One serving of 
food in this food group contains 30 g of carbohydrate, 4 g 
of protein, 1 g of fat and 150 kcal. In our main meal, this 
food group should ﬁ ll up only a quarter of Malaysian 
Healthy Plate.  
 
The third level in the food pyramid 2020 consist of protein 
sources which are categorised into 3 groups namely i) 
ﬁsh, ii) poultry, meat and egg and iii) legumes. It is 
recommended to have one serving of ﬁsh daily, whereby 
one serving contains 14 g protein and 2 g of fat and 70 
kcal. The recommendation for poultry/ meat/ eggs is one 
to two servings a day, of which one serving contains 14 g 
protein, 8 g of fat and 130 kcal. The cooked lean meat is 
limited to 500 g per week. Whilst, for protein from plant 
sources namely legumes are recommended one serving 
daily which contains 14 g protein, 0.5 g of fat and 220 kcal. 
Other than that, nuts and seeds are also protein sources 
but it contained high fat which contribute to high calorie, 
hence they can be consumed as snacks on a weekly 
basis. Both animal and plant based protein food should 
ﬁll up only a quarter of Malaysian Healthy Plate.  
 
In the Malaysian Food Pyramid 2020, the recommended 
number of servings for milk and milk products is 2 
servings, in which one serving contains 15 g 
carbohydrate, 8 g protein, 1 g of fat and 90 kcal. 
 
 
 
1.4 Current status  
A number of nutritional surveys have been conducted to 
assess the dietary intake of Malaysians since 2010. The 
second Malaysian Adults Nutrition Survey (IPH, 2014) was 
a nationwide cross-sectional study of Malaysian adult 
population aged 18-59 years old (N = 2,973). This survey 
reported that the median energy intake of Malaysians 
(overall) was 1,466 kcal/day, with men reported to be 
consuming 1,489 kcal/day and women 1,445 kcal/day. 
The ﬁndings were comparable with previous MANS in 
2003 (median overall 1,540 kcal/day; men 1,722 kcal/day; 
women 1,400 kcal/day) (Ahmad Ali et al., 2019b). 
However, the MANS ﬁndings should be interpreted with 
caution as further analysis revealed that under-reporting 
of dietary intake has increased signiﬁcantly from 53% in 
MANS 2003 to 61% in MANS 2014. The MANS in 2003 
and 2014 showed that under-reporting of energy and 
nutrient intake still persisted. Dietary reanalysis after 
excluding of under-reporters showed that the revised 
mean energy intake was 2,097 kcal in MANS 2003 and 
2,123 kcal for MANS 2014 (Ahmad Ali et al., 2019b), 
respectively.  
 
The Socio Cultural Research in Protein Transition 
(SCRiPT) study involving 1,604 Malaysian adults reported 
a mean energy intake of 1,776 kca/day (men 1,869 
kcal/day; women 1,699 kcal/day) (Drenowski et al., 2020). 
In addition, the Malaysia Lipid Study which was 
conducted among Malaysian urban dwellers (N = 577) 
reported a mean  energy intake of 1,825±413 kcal/day 
(Karupaiah et al., 2019). 
 
The ﬁndings of the MANS 2014 demonstrated that the 
median percentage of total energy contributed by 
macronutrients was 55% for carbohydrate, 16% for protein 
and 29% of fat. This was found to be similar in men and 
women (IPH, 2014). A more recent study reported a mean 
macronutrient distribution of approximately 54% 
carbohydrate, 14% protein, and 32% fat, respectively 
(Karupaiah et al., 2019). Both nationwide and individual 
studies included in a review and meta-analysis 
consistently showed that Malaysian adults generally 
consumed adequate or higher protein (80% of RNI) and 
fat (≤ 30% of total energy intake) across different groups 
of respondents, regardless of the dietary assessments tool 
used (Shahar et al., 2018). However, the ﬁ ndings were 
inconsistent with respect to carbohydrates with smaller 
studies reporting adequate intake (50-65% RNI) while a 
nation-wide survey (MANS 2014) reported a lower intake 
(Shahar et al., 2018). 
 
More recently, a literature review and meta-analysis was 
conducted to evaluate the best available evidence 
regarding energy and macronutrient intake among adults 
(aged 19 to 59 years) in Malaysia (Shahar et al., 2018). 
Information regarding levels and status of intake in 
comparison to the Malaysian Recommended Nutrient 
Intake (NCCFN, 2017), and sources of macronurients 
among the population, was collated from food balance 
sheets, national surveys, as well as individual studies. A 
total of 20 studies (ﬁve nationwide and 15 smaller studies) 
were included. Both the review and meta-analysis results 
indicated that Malaysian adults generally met or 
exceeded recommendation for fat and protein but were 
inconsistent with respect to energy and carbohydrate. For 
example, the MANS 2003 and MANS 2014 studies 
showed inadequate energy intakes among Malaysian 
adults. However, the ﬁndings of the meta-analysis did not 
take into consideration the re-analysis of the MANS 2003 
and 2014 data (Ahmad Ali et al., 2019a).  
 
The MANS 2014 evaluated the frequency of food 
consumption based on habitual intake of Malaysian 
adults aged 18 and 59 years during the last one year. The 
key ﬁndings of MANS 2014 revealed that the top ten foods 
consumed by Malaysians were rice (98.4%), hen egg 
(95.2%), green leafy vegetables (94.8%), chicken (94.5%), 
marine ﬁsh (93.5%), local kuih (79.9%), bread (78.3%), mee-
hoon/ kuew-teow (77.5%), noodles (76.8%), and soy sauce 
(76.6%). In addition, white rice and sugar were the two 
top most foods consumed on daily basis as these were 
consumed by 89.8% and 55.9% of the Malaysian adults, 
respectively (IPH, 2014).  
 
A recent review and meta-analysis on energy and 
macronutrient intake among adults (Shahar et al., 2018) 
demonstrated that the major macronutrient sources in 
Malaysian adults’ diet were animal products (poultry, 
meat, and ﬁ sh) for protein, vegetable oils (palm oil and 
palm kernel oil) for fat, and white rice, vegetables, and 
sugar for carbohydrates. The most recent National Health 
and Morbidity Survey, NHMS 2019 (IPH, 2020)  
demonstrated that 94.9% (95% CI = 93.82, 95.79) of the 
Malaysians did not consume adequate fruits (2 servings 
per day) and/ or vegetables (3 servings per day) as 
recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO, 
2003) or MDG 2010. This prevalence is consistently 
showing an increasing trend from 92.5% in the NHMS 
2011 and 94.0% in the NHMS 2015 (IPH, 2020).  
 
Attributed to the rapid urbanisation, increased household 
incomes, and greater dependence on processed food or 
eating out, Malaysia is experiencing a change in dietary 
trends. This nutrition transition involves the change from 
a traditional or agro-based, to a more ‘westernised’ or 
global diet and lifestyle (Popkin,  2006). This was 
evidenced by the ﬁndings of a study on an urban-living 
cohort comprising of typical racial mix of Malaysia 
(Balasubramanian et al., 2020). The ﬁndings revealed four 
dietary patterns: ‘Home Meal’ pattern which represented 
a high intake of white rice, sugar-sweetened beverages, 
and non-starchy vegetables; ‘Chinese Traditional’ pattern 
– high intake of noodle dishes, unsweetened plain coffee 
or tea; ‘Plant Foods’ pattern – a high intake of fruit and 
non-starchy vegetables and low eating out frequency; 
and ‘Sugar-sweetened Beverages’ pattern – a high intake 
of sugar-sweetened beverages such as tea or coff ee 
added with sugar or sweetened condensed milk, cocoa 
and malted beverages, and cordial or carbonated 
beverages. Among these, the ‘Sugar-sweetened 
Beverages’ pattern which was more dominant with Malay 
Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 8
Figure 1.1. Malaysian Food Pyramid 2020 
*Limit intake of fats, oils, 
   sugars and salt
Fish: 1 serving 
   Poultry/ eggs/ meat: 1-2 servings
      Legumes: 1 serving
Rice, other cereals,
  whole grain cereal-based 
    products and tubers: 
      3-5 servings
Fruits: 
   2 servings
Milk and milk products:
2 servings
Vegetables:
>
 3 servings
Plain water: 6-8 glasses 
1 glass = 250 ml 
MALAYSIAN FOOD PYRAMID 2020
Guide to Your DAILY Food Intake
Notes:
• The number of servings is calculated based on 1500 to 2300 kcal.
• This pyramid is meant for children aged 7 years and older; for younger children, refer to the Malaysian Dietary 
Guidelines (MDG) for Children and Adolescents.
• For adolescents aged 13 to 15 years, the recommendation for fruits is 2-3 servings and for milk and milk 
products 2-3 servings.
• For adolescents aged 16 to < 18 years, the recommendation for fruits is 2-3 servings, milk and milk products 
2-3 servings and for rice, other cereals, whole grain cereal-based products and tubers 3-6 servings.
* This includes ultra-processed foods which contain artificial substances such as colours, sweeteners, 
flavours, preservatives, and other additives.
Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 9
and Indian subjects, made up the largest proportion 
(35.1%). The study also found that men were least likely to 
practise the ‘Plant Foods’ pattern but most likely to have 
a diet that follows the ‘Sugar-sweetened Beverages’ 
pattern, whereas it was entirely reversed in women. 
 
In a recent study, Drewnowski et al. (2020) reported 
energy intakes were 1,869 kcal/d for men and 1,699 kcal/d 
for women. Protein intakes were 78.5 g/d for men and 72.5 
g/d for women. Higher energy and protein intakes were 
associated with Chinese ethnicity, higher education and 
incomes. Frequency counts identiﬁ ed plant proteins in 
50% of foods, followed by meat (19%), ﬁ sh (12%), eggs 
(12%), and dairy (7%). Most frequent source of meat was 
chicken (16%) rather than pork or beef (1.5% each). In 
multivariate regressions, education, urbanization and 
ethnicity were associated with animal proteins; rural 
setting, age, ethnicity, and religion were associated with 
plant proteins. Protein choices involve socio-cultural as 
well as economic variables. 
Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 10
1.5 Key Recommendations 
 
 
Key Recommendation 1 
 
Choose your daily food intake based on recommended number of servings in the Malaysian Food Pyramid 2020.  
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. Choose a combination of all food groups in the Malaysian F
ood Pyramid 2020 (Figure 1.1) to ensure the 
body gets all the nutrients needed within the recommended amount.  
 
2. Choose the recommended number of servings for each food group based on your caloric needs (Table 
1.1 and Table 1.2). For food serving equivalent list, please refer Table 1.3 to Table 1.9.   
 
3. Plan your daily menu based on your recommended number of servings for each food group (Refer to 
Table 1.10 to Table 1.13 for menu examples). 
 
4. Limit intake of fats and oils as well as salt and sugars in your daily diet. 
 
5. Limit intake of processed and ultra-processed foods. 
 
Table 1.1:  Recommended number of servings for each food group based on 1500 kcal, 1800 kcal and 2000 
kcal per day 
Food group
Vegetable1 > 3 >  3 >  3  
Fruit2 2 2 2  
Rice, other cereals, wholegrain cereal-based products and tubers3 3 4 5  
Poultry/ Meat/ Egg4 1 1 2  
Fish5 1 1 1 
Legumes (combine bean, lentil and soy)6 1 1 1  
Milk & milk products7 2 2 2  
Fats /oils (including 1 serving from nuts and seeds)8 68 9  
Sugar9 11 2
Recommended  
number of servings
1500 
kcal*
1800  
kcal*
2000  
kcal*
Notes: 
Tips to remember, the more physically active you are, the more calories are required per day. However, if you are very sedentary, less calories 
are needed per day.  
1 Calorie free 
2 Based on 15 g carbohydrate and 60 kcal per serving;  
3 Based on 30 g carbohydrate, 4 g protein, 1 g fat and 150 kcal per serving;  
4 Based on 14 g protein, 8 g fat and 130 kcal per serving;  
5 Based on 14 g protein, 2 g fat and 70 kcal per serving;  
6 Based on 40 g carbohydrate, 14 g protein, 0.5 g fat and 220 kcal per serving.  
7 Based on 15 g carbohydrate, 8 g protein, 1 g fat and 90 kcal per serving;  
8 Based on 5 g fat and 45 kcal (including 1 serving of nuts & seeds = 5 g of fat and 65 kcal);  
9 Based on 15 g CHO and 60 kcal. 1 serving of sugar = 3 teaspoons; 1 teaspoon = 5 g of carbohydrate and 20 kcal. 
Sources: Suzana et al. (2015); *RNI (2017) 
 
 
Vegetables 3 1/2 cup spinach, cooked  
1 cup ulam    
1/2 cup mixed vegetables, cooked (i.e., 
cabbage + carrot + baby corn + french bean) 
 
Fruits 2 1 whole medium pisang berangan 
1 whole medium apple 
 
Rice, other cereals,  4 2 slices wholemeal bread  
wholegrain cereal-based   2 scoops white rice, cooked 
products and tubers 1
1/2 cups spaghetti, cooked 
4 pieces wholegrain crackers 
 
Poultry/ Meat/ Egg 1 1 medium chicken drumstick OR 
1 palm size lean beef OR  
2 hen eggs 
 
Fish 1 1 medium Indian Mackerel (ikan kembung)  
 
Legumes 1 1
1/2 square pieces tauhu 
 
Milk & milk products 2 1 glass low fat milk  
2 slices cheese 
 
Fats/ oils 8 8 tsp 
 
Sugar (including free sugar) 1 3 tsp 
Table 1.2: Example of common foods (per serving) in household measurement for intake of 1800 kcal per day 
Food group Servings/ day Serving size in household measurement
Note:  
Please refer to Table 1.3 to Table 1.9 for list of foods in each food group with serving size.  
Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 11
Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 12
Figure 1.2: Malaysian Healthy Plate 
 
How to Achieve  
 
1. Use the Malaysian Healthy Plate for your daily main meals,
 which is based on the quarter-quarter-half concept 
(Figure 1.4). 
 
a. Fill in the ﬁrst quarter of your plate with rice/ other cereals (e.g: meehoon)/ wholegrain cereal-based 
products (e.g: wholegrain bread)/ tubers (e.g: sweet potato). It is recommended to ﬁll in this ﬁrst quarter 
with whole grains. 
 
b. Fill in the second quarter of your plate with ﬁsh/ poultry/ meat/ egg/ legumes (e.g: dhall, tempeh, soy 
beancurd)/ dairy products. 
 
c. Fill the other half of your plate with vegetables and fruits. 
 
2. Drink plain water or unsweetened beverages with the meal. 
 
3. Consume milk or milk products as recommended. 
 
4. Add legumes as snacks if legumes are not included in your main meals. 
 
5. Limit additional soy sauce, tomato sauce, chilli sauce and gravies high in salt, sugar and fat to your main meal. 
 
 
Key Recommendation 2 
 
Eat your main meals (breakfast, lunch and dinner) as recommended by the Malaysian Healthy Plate. 
Fish, Poultry, Eggs, Meat and Legumes
Fruits
Vegetables
Rice, Other cereals, Whole grain
Cereal-based products and Tubers

Key Recommendation 3 
 
Limit intake of processed and ultra-processed food. 
 
How to achieve 
 
1. Limit intake of ultra-processed foods such as soft drinks,
 sweetened breakfast cereals, salty fatty packaged 
snacks and instant noodles, which are nutritionally unbalanced. 
 
2. Prepare or choose natural ingredients for cooking instead of using ingredients made from commercially prepared  
processed or ultra-processed foods such as ﬁsh ball, meat balls, salami, sausage and etc. 
 
3. Reduce frequency of eating at fast food outlets and buying ready to eat frozen foods sold in convenient stores. 
 
4. Be aware that advertising of ultra-processed products dominates commercial advertising of food; it often 
conveys incorrect or incomplete information about diet and health. 
 
5. Shop mindfully. Limit purchasing of processed and ultra-processed products. 
Additional recommendation: Nutrient supplements  
 
Eating a variety of foods daily as guided by the Malaysian F ood Pyramid should provide all the nutrients needed by 
the body. 
Therefore, supplements are not necessary for most individuals. Supplements of vitamins, minerals or ﬁbre do 
not supply the nutrients and other essential components present in foods that are important to health. Nutrient 
supplements cannot be used as a substitute for proper food choices and supplements of some nutrients taken regularly 
in large amounts are harmful. However, supplements may be needed to meet speciﬁc nutrient requirements such as 
during convalescence, in pregnant and lactating women and for the elderly. Nutrient supplements should only be 
taken on the advice of nutritionists, dietitians and medical doctors. 
Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 13

14 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
1.6 References  
 
Ahmad Ali Z, Norazmir MN, Saﬁah MY, Adriana Irawati Nur I, Tahir A & Foo LH (2019a). Changes in energy and 
nutrient intakes in the adult population of Malaysia: Findings from the Malaysian Adult Nutrition Survey 
(MANS) 2003 and MANS 2014. Mal J Nutr 25(2):273-285. 
 
Ahmad Ali Z, Norazmir MN, Sa ﬁah MY, Adriana Irawati Nur I, Tahir A & Foo LH (2019b). Under-reporting of 
energy and nutrient intake is still a persistent issue in the Malaysian Adult Nutrition Surveys. Mal J Nutr 
25(2):261-271. 
 
Balasubramanian GV, Chuah KA, Khor BH Sualeheen  A,  Yeak ZW, Chinna K, Sundram K & Karupaiah T (2020). 
Associations of eating mode deﬁned by dietary patterns with cardiometabolic risk factors in the Malaysia 
Lipid Study Population.  Nutrients 12:2080. doi:10.3390/nu12072080. 
 
Carlsen MH, Halvorsen BL & Blomhoff R (2011). Antioxidants in nuts and seeds. In: Preedy V, Watson R (Ed.), 
Nuts and Seeds in Health and Disease Prevention. 1
st ed. pp. 55-64. Academic Press, New York. 
doi:10.1016/b978-0-12-375688-6.10006-4.  
 
Colle I, Lemmens L, Van Buggenhout S, Van Loey A & Hendrickx M (2010). Effect of thermal processing on the 
degradation, isomerization, and bioaccessibility of lycopene in tomato pulp. J Food Sci, 75(9):C753-C759. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3841.2010.01862.x.  
 
Dehghan M, Mente A, Rangarajan S, Sheridan P, Mohan V, Iqbal R, Gupta R, Lear S, Wentzel-Viljoen E, Avezum 
A, Lopez-Jaramillo P, Mony P, Varma RP, Kumar R, Chifamba J, Alhabib KF, Mohammadifard N, Oguz A, Lanas 
F, Rozanska D, Bostrom KB, Yusoff K, Tsolkile LP, Dans A, Yusufali A, Orlandini A, Poirier P, Khatib R, Hu B, Wei 
L, Yin L, Deeraili A, Yeates K, Yusuf R, Ismail N, Mozaffarian D, Teo K, Anand SS & Yusuf S (2018.) Association 
of dairy intake with cardiovascular disease and mortality in 21 countries from ﬁve continents (PURE): A 
prospective cohort study. Lancet 392(10161):2288–2297. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31812-9. 
 
Drewnowski A, Mognard E, Gupta S, Ismail MN, Karim NA, Tibère L, Laporte C, Alem Y, Khusun H, Februhartanty 
J, Anggraini R & Poulain JP (2020). Socio-cultural and economic drivers of plant and animal protein 
consumption in Malaysia: The SCRiPT study. Nutrients 12(5):1530. doi: 10.3390/nu12051530.  
 
Fournier T, Tibère L, Laporte C, Mognard E, Ismail MN, Sharif SP & Poulain JP (2016). Eating patterns and 
prevalence of obesity. Lessons learned from the Malaysian Food Barometer. Appetite 107:362-371. 
 
FAO (2019). Ultra-processed foods, diet quality, and health using the NOVA classiﬁcation system. Monteiro CA, 
Cannon G, Lawrence M, Costa Louzada ML & Pereira Machado P. Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations. Rome. 
 
IPH (2014). The National Health and Morbidity Survey 2014: Malaysian Adult Nutrition Survey (MANS) Vol II 
Survey Findings. Institute for Public Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
IPH (2020). National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS) 2019. Vol. 1: NCDs – Non-Communicable Diseases: 
Risk Factors and other Health Problems. Institute of Public Health, National Institutes of Health, Ministry of 
Health Malaysia, Selangor. 
 
Karupaiah T, Chuah KA, Chinna K, Pressman P, Clemens RA, Hayes AW & Sundram KA (2019). Cross-sectional 
study on the dietary pattern impact on cardiovascular disease biomarkers in Malaysia. Sci Rep 9(1):13666. 
doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-49911-6. 
 
Kim Y, Keogh JB & Clifton PM (2019). Does nut consumption reduce mortality and/or risk of cardiometabolic 
disease? An updated review based on meta-analyses. Int J Environ Res Public Health 16:4957. 
 
Lane MM, Davis JA, Beattie S, Gómez-Donoso C, Loughman A, O'Neil A, Jacka F, Berk M, Page R, Marx, M & 
Rocks T (2020). Ultra-processed food and chronic noncommunicablediseases: A systematic review and meta-
analysis of 43 observational studies. Obesity Reviews. 2020;1–19. 
 
McCrory MA, Burke A & Roberts SB. (2012). Dietary (sensory) variety and energy balance . Physiol Behav 
107(4):576-583. doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2012.06.012. 
 
Moghtaderi F, Ramezani-Jolfaie N, Raeisi-Dehkordi H & Salehi-Abargouei A (2020). Sesame seed and its 
fractions for improving oxidative stress in adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis of controlled clinical 
trials. Food Rev Int 36(8):727-744. doi:10.1080/87559129.2019.1683744.  
15Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
MOH (2016). Panduan Pinggan Sihat Malaysia. Kementerian Kesihatan Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
 
Monteiro CA (2009). Nutrition and health. The issue is not food, nor nutrients, so much as processing. Public 
Health Nutrition, 12(5): 729-731. 
 
Monteiro CA, Cannon G, Moubarac JC, Levy RB, Louzada MLC & Jaime PC (2018). The UN decade of nutrition, 
the NOVA food classi ﬁcation and the trouble with ultra-processing. Public Health Nutrition, 21(1): 5-17. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980017000234 
 
Monteiro CA, Cannon G, Levy RB, Moubarac JC, Louzada MLC, Rauber F, Khandpur N, Cediel G, Neri D, Steele 
EM, Baraldi LG & Jaime PC (2019a). Ultra-processed foods: what they are and how to identify them. Public 
Health Nutrition: 22(5), 936–941. 
 
Monteiro CA, Cannon G, Lawrence M, Costa Louzada, M & Pereira Machado P (2019b). Ultra-processed foods, 
diet quality, and health using the NOVA classiﬁcation system. Rome, FAO 
 
NCCFN (2010). Malaysian Dietary Guidelines. National Coordinating Committee on Food and Nutrition, Ministry 
of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
 
NCCFN (2017). Recommended Nutrient Intakes. A report of the Technical Working Group on Nutritional 
Guidelines. National Coordinating Committee on Food and Nutrition, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
 
NHMRC (2013). Australian Dietary Guidelines. National Health and Medical Research Council, Canberra. 
 
Nurul Izzah A., Wan Rozita, W.M., Tengku Rozaina TM, Cheong Y.L., Siti Fatimah D., Nasriyah CH., Nor Aini A, 
Raﬁza S. & Lokman, HS. 2016. Fish consumption pattern among adults of di fferent ethnics in Peninsular 
Malaysia. Food and Nutrition Research 60:32697 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4989178/pdf/FNR-60-32697.pdf 
 
Orsavova J, Misurcova L, Ambrozova JV, Vicha R & Mlcek J (2015) Fatty acids composition of vegetable oils and 
its contribution to dietary energy intake and dependence of cardiovascular mortality on dietary intake of fatty 
acids. Int J Mol Sci 16(6):12871-12890. doi: 10.3390/ijms160612871. 
 
PAHO 2015. Ultra-processed food and drinks products in Latin America. Pan American Health Organization, 
Washington DC. 
 
Popkin BM (2006). Global nutrition dynamics: The world is shifting rapidly toward a diet linked with 
noncommunicable diseases. .Am J Clin Nutr 84(2):289-298.  
 
Rozenberg S, Body JJ, Bruyère O, Bergmann P, Brandi ML, Cooper C, Devogelae JP, Gielen E, Goemaere S, 
Kaufman JM, Rizzoli R & Reginster JY (2016). Effects of dairy products consumption on health: Beneﬁts and 
beliefs—A commentary from the Belgian Bone Club and the European Society for clinical and economic 
aspects of osteoporosis, osteoarthritis and musculoskeletal diseases. Calcif Tissue Int 98(1):1-17.  
 
Shahar S, Jan Mohamed HJ, de los Reyes F & Amarra SA (2018). Adherence of Malaysian adults’ energy and 
macronutrient intakes to national recommendations: A review and meta-analysis. Nutrients 10:1884.   
 
Shahar S, Mohd Yusoff NA, Saﬁ NS, Ghazali R & Ahmad R (2015). Atlas of Food Exchanges & Portion Sizes. 3rd 
ed. MDC Publishers Sdn. Bhd. 
 
Tee E.S., Mohd Ismail N., Mohd Nasir A., & Khatijah I. 1997. Nutrient Composition of Malaysian Foods. 4th ed. 
Malaysian Food Composition Database Programme. Institute for Medical Research. Kuala Lumpur. 
 
Trinidad TP, Mallillin AC, Loyola AS, Sagum RS & Encabo RR (2010). The potential health beneﬁts of legumes as 
a good source of dietary ﬁbre. Br J Nutr103:569-574. 
 
USDHHS & USDA (2015). Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2015. US Department of Health and Human Services 
& US Department of Agriculture. 
 
WHO (2003). Diet, Nutrition and The Prevention of Chronic Diseases. Report of a Joint WHO/FAO Expert 
Consultation. Geneva, Switzerland. 
 
 
 
16 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Appendices
17Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
18 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Appendices 
 
Table 1.3: Examples of vegetables equivalent to one serving  
Vegetables, cruciferous, cookeda1 /2 cup (50 g) 
Vegetables, green leafy vegetables with edible stem, 1/2 cup (40 g) 
cookedb  
Vegetables, fruit, cookedc 1/2 cup (40 g) 
Vegetables, leafy ulam, rawd 1 cup (50 g) 
Vegetables, beans, cookede1 /2 cup (50 g) 
Vegetables, flowers, cookedf1 /2 cup (50 g) 
Vegetables, sprouting, cookedg1 /2 cup (50 g) 
Vegetables, starchyh 1/2 cup (60 g) 
Vegetable juice, with pulp, no sugar added 1/2 glass (125 ml) 
Other vegetablesi:  
Mushroom (white/ brown/ shitaki/ enoki, erygii, button, 1/2 cup/ 6 pieces (40 g) 
oyster mushroom), fresh/ soaked, cooked  
Fungus (black fungus, white fungus), cooked 1/2 cup (40 g) 
Mixed vegetables, cookedj 1/2 cup (50 g) 
Wolfberry (Goji berry), dried 1 cup (50 g)
Groups of Vegetables Serving size (Weight)
Note: 
* Serving size and food weight are measured in edible portions. 
a Cruciferous such as cabbage, broccoli and cauliﬂower. 
b Green leafy-vegetables with edible stem such as kangkung, sawi, pucuk manis, bayam, sayur meranti, kau kee, daun keledek, drumstick 
leaf, gongura, tropical amaranths, sessile joyweed, tong ho kalan and makchoi. 
c Fruit vegetables such as brinjal, tomato, chayote (fo shou gua), capsicum, angled loofah (petola), bitter gourd, sour eggplant (terung asam 
Dayak), squash, snake gourd, pointed gourd (parwal), ridged gourd (turai) and bottle gourd. 
d Leafy ulam such as pegaga, ulam raja, lettuce and garden salad. 
e Vegetables, beans such as string bean, snow pea, lady ﬁngers and French bean. 
f Vegetables, ﬂowers such as daylily (golden needles/ jin zhen cai) and asparagus. 
g Vegetables, sprouting such as soya sprout, green bean sprout (taugeh), pea sprout (dou miao) and alfalfa. 
h Vegetables, starchy such as carrot, radish, pumpkin, beet root, lotus root, yam bean (sengkuang), water chestnut (sengkuang cina), Chinese 
yam (huai san) and arrowroot (fen ge). 
i Other vegetables such as mushroom, fungus and seaweed are rich sources of micronutrients such as iron, iodine and Vitamin B12 but low 
in ﬁbre. Consume with other vegetable groups such as cruciferous, green leafy-vegetables and fruit vegetables to obtain optimum 
phytonutrients.  
j Mixed vegetables refers to a combination of several types of vegetables such as cabbage + carrot + baby corn + French bean. 
19Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
 
 
Table 1.4: Examples of fruits equivalent to one serving   
Ambarella (kedondong) 6 whole medium sized (200 g) 
Guava 1 big slice (110 g) 
Banana, berangan 1 whole medium sized (60 g) 
Banana, Cavendish 1/2 whole medium sized (60 g) 
Banana, mas 2 whole medium sized (60 g) 
Ciku 1 whole medium sized (80 g) 
Dragon fruit, red 1 slice/ 1/3 whole medium sized (135 g) 
Langsat 20 whole fruits (180 g) 
Mango 1/2 whole large sized (100 g) 
Papaya 1 slice/ 1/4 whole medium sized (110 g) 
Pineapple 1 slice/ 1/4 whole medium sized (150 g) 
Water apple (jambu air) 10 whole fruits (500 g) 
Watermelon 1 big slice (250 g) 
Apple 1 whole medium sized (110 g) 
Durian (7 x 3 cm) 5 ulas (40 g) 
Grapes 8 small (90 g) 
Jackfruit (cempedak) 4 pieces (60 g) 
Jackfruit (nangka) 5 pieces (190 g) 
Pear, green
1/2 whole medium sized (100 g) 
Pear, yellow/ Orange 1 whole medium sized (160 g) 
Rambutan (4.5 X 3cm) 6 whole fruits (110 g) 
Orange (Limau manis) 1 whole, medium (134 g) 
Dates, pitted, dried 2 pieces (20 g) 
Raisin 1 heap dessert spoon (20 g) 
Prunes, pitted, dried 4  pieces (20 g) 
Figs, dried 3 pieces  (25 g) 
Fruit juice, with pulp & without added sugar 1/2 glass (125 ml)
Fruits *Serving size (weight)
Note: 
*Serving size and food weight are measured in edible portions.
20 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Table 1.5: Examples of rice, other cereals, whole grain cereal-based products and tubers equivalent to one serving  
Rice, brown/ multigrain/ unpolished/ 1 cup/ 2 rice scoops (100 g) 
parboiled/ white, cooked  
Noodles, mee-hoon made of brown/ white  1½ cups (150 g) 
rice flour/ sago noodles (tang-hoon), soaked  
Noodles, mee/ kuih-teow / laksa, wet 1 cup (100 g) 
Pasta/ spaghetti/ macaroni, cooked 1½ cups (150 g) 
Porridge, brown/ white rice, plain, cooked 2 cups (330 g) 
Corn, without skin and cob, cooked 1/3 medium ear (40 g) 
Corn kernel, without margarine, cooked 3 dessert spoons/  (40 g) 
1/3 commercial cup  
Cornflake, without milk and added sugar 1 cup/ 8 dessert spoons (30 g) 
Bran, coarse, uncooked 1 cup/ 10 dessert spoons (100 g) 
Oats (rolled/ processed)/ wheat germ, uncooked 6 dessert spoons (40 g) 
Muesli, without milk 4 dessert spoons (45 g) 
Quinoa, cooked 1 cup/ 2 rice scoops (150 g) 
Wheat (gandum)/ barley, without gravy, cooked 12 dessert spoons/ 3/4 cup (150 g) 
Potatoes, without skin, raw 2 whole medium sized (160 g) 
Sweet potato/ yam (taro)/ tapioca, without skin, 1/2 cup/  1/3 of a whole medium sized (70 g) 
raw (1 cm cube)  
Bread, wholemeal/ ryemeal/ white 2 square slices (60 g) 
Roti canai 1 piece (95 g) 
Bread, pita, wholemeal
1/2 piece (40 g) 
Buna 1 rectangular bun/ 2 small buns (50g) 
Capati (D= 20cm) 1/2 piece (50 g) 
Dosai/ rawa dosai (D=20cm) 1 piece (80 g) 
Idli (D= 6cm) 2 small pieces (110 g) 
Pau, with filling 1/2 piece (40 g) 
Putu mayam 2  pieces (100 g) 
Biscuit,  wholemeal crackers/ Marie/ milkb 5 pieces (30 g) 
Biscuits, plain/ cream  crackers/ oatmealb 4 pieces (45 g) 
Rice, other cereals, whole grain cereals-based 
products and tubers *Serving size (weight)
Note: 
* Serving size and food weight are measured in edible portion. 
** Preferably choose wholegrain foods in your daily diet. 
a Choose healthier bun such as less sweet, no cream or sweet ﬁlling, and fortiﬁed with micronutrients or healthy ingredients. 
b Choose healthier biscuits such as low fat, sugar, no cream or sweet ﬁlling and low sodium. 
21Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Table 1.6: Examples of legumes, nuts and seeds equivalent to one serving  
Soya bean, yellow/ black, cooked 1 cup (180 g) 
Soya bean cake, fermented (tempeh) 2 rectangular pieces (90 g) 
Soya bean curd, tau-kua/ hard/ traditional/ 11/2 pieces (150 g) 
fried tau-hoo, compressed tau-hoo (dou fu gan),  
(6 x 6 cm)  
Soya bean curd, soft tau-hoo (tauhu lembut), 1 box (240 g) 
(18 x 5 cm)  
Soya bean curd, tau-hoo-pok, (D= 3 cm) 4 round pieces (60 g) 
Egg tau-hoo (tauhu telur) 11/2 packet (200 g) 
Soya bean chip (dou bao), fresh (5 x5 cm) 5 pieces (50 g) 
Soya bean sheet (fucok sheets), dried, raw 1 sheet (30 g) 
(42.5 x 14 cm)  
Soy bean milk, fresh, unsweetened 11/2 glasses (375 ml) 
Soy bean dessert, tau-hoo-fah, unsweetened 2 containers (700 g) 
Gram, chickpeas/ black-eyed peas/ kidney beans, 1 cup (180 g) 
without gravy, cooked  
Gram, red beans/ mung beans, without gravy, 11/2 cups (260 g) 
cooked  
Dhal, various split pea/ lentils (chana dhal/ kadalei, 1 cup (180 g) 
red lentils/ masoor, green lentils, urad), cooked  
Baked beans/ green peas, beans only, canned 1
1/2 cups/ 1 whole medium canned (400 g) 
Lotus seedsa 1 cup (120 g) 
Nuts, peanuts/ almonds/ cashew nutsb 10 pcs/ 2 dessert spoons (15 g) 
Nuts, walnutb 1 pc (15 g) 
Seeds, chia seeds/ flax seeds/ pumpkin seeds/ 2 dessert spoons (15 g) 
sesame seeds/ watermelon seeds/ sunflower  
seedsb  
Seeds, kuacib 10 pcs/ 2 dessert spoons (15 g)
Legumes, nuts and seeds Serving size (weight)
Note: 
* Serving size and food weight are measured in edible portion. 
a Lotus seeds are categorised as nuts and seeds group, but considering this food is a good source of protein and low in fat. Therefore, the 
serving size of lotus seed was calculated based on protein content instead of fat. 
b Nuts and seeds were calculated based on fat exchange. 1 serving of nuts/ seeds = 5 g of fat.
22 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Table 1.7: Examples of fish and seafood equivalent to one serving   
Fish, mackerel, Indian, without head & entrails, 1 whole medium sized (70 g) 
rawa  
Fish, bream, African (ikan tilapia), 1 whole medium sized (90 g) 
without head & entrails, raw  
Fish, sardine/ tamban, without head & entrails, 2 whole small sized (60 g) 
fresh, raw  
Fish, scad, yellow tail (ikan selar), 2/3 of a whole  medium sized (70 g) 
without head & entrails, rawb  
Fish cut, mackerel, Spanish (Ikan tenggiri), 1 piece (70 g) 
rawc (14 cm x 8 cm)  
Fish, sardine, canned 3 small pieces/ 2/3 of a small can (90 g) 
Anchovies, whole/ without head & entrails, dried 2/3 cup (25 g) 
Prawn, without head & shell, raw 12 pieces (80 g) 
Squid, without skin & entrails, raw 1 whole medium sized (80 g) 
Fish and seafood Serving size (weight)
Note: 
* Serving size and food weight are measured in edible portion. 
a Fish, mackerel Indian include ikan kembong, pelaling, mabung and termenung. 
b Similar serving size and food weight for ikan cincaru, Selayang, bawal (hitam, tambak, putih) and keli. 
c Similar serving size and food weight for barred Spannish (ikan tenggiri batang), sting ray (ikan pari) and salmon. 
Table 1.8: Examples of poultry, meat and egg equivalent to one serving  
Chicken, drumstick/ thigh, without bone, raw 1 piece (100 g) 
Chicken, breast, without skin, raw (14 x 7 x 1 cm) 1/2  medium sized piece (70 g) 
Chicken, cut into 12 pieces, raw 1 piece (70 g) 
Beef, lean (1 palm size), raw 1 piece (60 g) 
Egg, century/ duck 2 whole (120 g) 
Egg, hen, grade A, without shell 2 whole (100 g) 
Egg, quail, without shell 12 whole (120 g)
Poultry, meat and egg *Serving size (weight)
Note: 
* Serving size and food weight are measured in edible portion. 
23Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Table 1.9: Examples of milk & milk products equivalent to one serving 
Milk, full cream/ fresh/ low fat 1 glass (250 ml) 
Milk, evaporated 1/2 glass (125 ml) 
Milk, powdered, full cream/ skimmed (heap) 4 heap dessert spoons (30 g) 
Cheese, cottage/ spread 3 heap dessert spoons (40 g) 
Cheese, processed, slice (8 x 8 cm) 2 square slices (40 g) 
Yoghurt, natural/ fat free/ low fat, plain 2 yoghurt pots (270 g) 
Yoghurt, Greek style 1 yoghurt pot (135 g)
Milk & milk products Serving size (weight)
Standard household measurements used in this dietary guideline are as follows: 
• 1 rice scoop =   50 g 
• 1 tablespoon (tbsp) =   15 ml  
• 1 dessert spoon (dsp) =   10 ml  
• 1 teaspoon (tsp) =     5 ml  
• 1 glass = 250 ml  
• 1 cup = 200 ml 
1 rice scoop 1 glass 1 cup1 tbsp 1 dsp 1 tsp
Figure 1.3: Standard household measurements used in this dietary guideline
1No
Step 1
Explanation
2No
Step 2
Explanation
Imagine of the three parts in a plate.
• Use a round plate with 10 inches (25 cm) in diameter. Imagine 
there is a line at the middle of the plate. Then, on one half of 
the plate, divide it further into two parts: thus nabbed 3 parts 
on the plate.
• The foods and their serving size from each part are inter-
changeable within same food group.
Fill in the first quarter of your plate with rice/ 
other cereals (e.g: meehoon)/ wholegrain 
cereal-based products (e.g: wholegrain bread)/ 
tubers (e.g: sweet potato). It is recommended 
to fill in this first quarter with whole grains.
• This food group is the major source of energy where rice is a 
staple food for Malaysians.
 
• The types of rice commonly consumed are brown/ white rice, 
and glutinous rice. Other grains and cereal products are 
noodles, pasta, breads, corns, barley and oats. Some  
examples of tubers are potatoes, sweet potatoes and cassava.
• Malaysians are encouraged to take whole grain to fill this quarter of this plate.
• Taking whole grain can help reduce constipation and increase the satiety that helps in weight 
management and reduces the risk of heart disease and diabetes.
• Whole grain is also an important source of fibres, vitamins and minerals.
• Examples of whole grain include brown rice, whole meal breads, whole grain noodles, whole 
grain pasta, whole grain biscuit, whole grain capati, oats, barley and corns.
24 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
In ensuring the intake of your main meals (breakfast, lunch and dinner) is healthy and in accordance 
with your daily requirement, the following are the steps on how to plan and take your main meal 
using the Malaysian Healthy Plate:
 
Figure 1.4: How to plan and take your main meal using the Malaysian Healthy Plate
3No
Step 3
Explanation
Step 4
Explanation
4No
Fill in the second quarter of your plate with 
fish/ poultry/ meat/ egg/ legumes (e.g: dhall, 
tempeh, soy beancurd)/ dairy products.
• Protein in human diet comes from two main sources, namely 
animal protein (e.g., fish, meat, chicken, eggs) and plant protein 
such as legume (e.g. soya bean, tempeh), beans (e.g. green 
peas, baked beans) and lentils (e.g. chana dhal, green lentils).
• Protein is an important nutrient in building and restoring body 
tissues.
• It is recommended to eat fish more often in a week than other 
protein sources. Fish such as tuna, salmon, Indian mackerel 
(ikan kembung), Spanish mackerel (ikan tenggiri), contain 
omega 3 fatty acids that are important for a healthy heart. 
Fill the other half of your plate dishes with 
vegetables and add fruits. 
• Vegetables that are encouraged to be taken are green leafy 
vegetables (e.g., spinach, green mustard and salad), coloured 
vegetables (e.g., red spinach, purple cabbage), fruit vegetables 
(e.g., capsicum, pumpkin, tomato and cucumber and beans  
(e.g., long beans and beans), ulam (e.g., pegaga and ulam raja) 
and edible vegetable stems (e.g., celery and asparagus).
• Prepare vegetables using healthy cooking methods such as steaming, blanching and stir frying.
• Fruit such as guava, kedondong, papaya, banana, melon and mango are encouraged to be taken 
in daily diet.
• Vegetables and fruits are rich in fibres, vitamin and minerals that are beneficial to health.
• A high fibre diet can reduce the risk of cardiovascular diseases, obesity and diabetes.
• Choose chicken, mutton and meat with less fat to reduce the saturated fat intake and help 
maintain normal cholesterol levels.
• A diet with high saturated fat increases the risk of coronary heart diseases.
• Plant proteins including legumes (e.g., dal, bean, red beans, soya beans, almonds, walnut, 
pistachio) and seeds (sunflower seeds) are also encouraged as these foods are low in saturated 
fat and contain vitamins and minerals such as zinc, iron and magnesium.
Figure 1.4: How to plan and take your main meal using the Malaysian Healthy Plate (cont...)
25Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
5No
Malaysian
Healthy
Plate
To complete the plate, drink plain water or 
unsweetened beverages, milk or dairy 
products.
• Plain water is encouraged to be taken to 
replace sugary drinks to help reduce calorie 
intake and control body weight and dental  
caries.
• Drink at least 6-8 glasses of plain water 
daily.
• Milk and milk products are an important 
source of calcium for healthy teeth and 
bones.
• Milk and milk product also an important source of protein, vitamin A, riboflavin (vitamin 
B2) and potassium.
• It is advisable to choose for fresh/ full cream milk and milk product. For those tend to 
losing weight or patients with hyperlipidemia, choose low fat or skim milk and milk 
product.
• Intake of unsweetened soya bean or soy products (tofu, tempe) also helps fulfill the 
calcium requirement.
Explanation
Step 5
Figure 1.4: How to plan and take your main meal using the Malaysian Healthy Plate (cont...)
26 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
27Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Meal time Example of one day menu
Breakfast 2 slices (60 g) of wholegrain bread  
1 glass of milk 
Morning tea break 1-2 pots of plain yoghurt 
Lunch 2 scoops of brown rice  
1 scoop (60 g) of stir-fried spinach with tauhu  
1 scoop (30 g) of string beans + brinjal  
1 piece of fried fish with chilli (80 g)  
1 whole medium apple  
1 glass of plain water 
Afternoon tea break 1 glass of unsweetened soya milk 
Dinner 2 scoops of brown rice  
1 scoop (60 g) of stir-fried kangkung  
1 bowl of (250 g) of chicken soup with carrot  
1 slice (159 g) of papaya medium size  
1 glass of plain water
Table 1.10: 
Example of one day menu and serving size of each food group for 1500 kcal
Food group *Total number of  
servings in a day
Vegetable 3 servings 
Fruit 2 servings 
Rice, other cereals, wholegrain cereal-based products, and tubers 3 servings 
Poultry/ meat/ egg 1 serving 
Fish 1 serving 
Legumes 1 serving 
Milk & milk products 2 servings 
Fats/ oils 6 servings 
Sugar 1 serving
Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 28
Meal time Example of one day menu
Table 1.11: Example of one day menu and *serving size of each food group for 1800 kcal
Food group *Total number of  
servings in a day
Vegetable 3 servings 
Fruit 2 servings 
Rice, other cereals, wholegrain cereal-based products, and tubers 4 servings 
Poultry/ meat/ egg 1 serving 
Fish 1 serving 
Legumes 1 serving 
Milk & milk products 2 servings 
Fats/ oils 8 servings 
Sugar 1 serving
Breakfast 2 slices (60 g) of wholegrain bread  
1 slice of cheese 
1 glass of milk 
Morning tea break 1-2 pots of plain yoghurt 
Lunch 2 scoops of brown rice  
1 scoop (60 g) of stir-fried spinach with tauhu  
1 scoop (30 g) of string beans + brinjal  
1 piece of fried fish with chilli (80 g)  
1 whole medium apple  
1 glass of plain water 
Afternoon tea break 4 pieces of wholegrain crackers (20 g) 
1/2 cup of boiled chickpeas (80 g) 
Dinner 2 scoops of brown rice  
1 scoop (60 g) of stir-fried kangkung  
1 bowl of (250 g) of chicken soup with carrot  
1/2 whole (159 g) of guava small size  
1 glass of plain water
Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 29
Meal time Example of one day menu
Table 1.12: Example of one day menu and *serving size of each food group for 2000 kcal
Food group *Total number of  
servings in a day
Vegetable 3 servings 
Fruit 2 servings 
Rice, other cereals, wholegrain cereal-based products, and tubers 5 servings 
Poultry/ meat/ egg 2 serving 
Fish 1 serving 
Legumes 1 serving 
Milk & milk products 2 servings 
Fats/ oils 9 servings 
Sugar 2 servings
Breakfast 2 slices (60 g) of wholegrain bread  
1 slice of cheese 
1 omelette 
1 glass of milk 
Morning tea break 1 pot of plain yoghurt 
1 cup whole grain wheat breakfast cereal without added sugar 
Lunch 2 scoops of brown rice  
1 scoop (60 g) of stir-fried spinach with tauhu  
1 scoop (30 g) of string beans + brinjal  
1 piece of fried fish with chilli (80 g)  
1 whole medium apple  
1 glass of plain water 
Afternoon tea break 4 pieces of wholegrain crackers (20 g) 
1 1/2 pieces (158 g) of stuffed tauhu 
Dinner 2 scoops of brown rice  
1 scoop (60 g) of stir-fried kangkung  
1 bowl (250 g) of chicken, taukua and carrot stew  
1/2 whole (80 g) of mango medium size  
1 glass of plain water
Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 30
KEY 
MESSAGE
2
Achieve and maintain a 
healthy body weight
22
KEY MESSAGE
ACHIEVE AND MAINTAIN  
A HEALTHY BODY WEIGHT
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Mahenderan Appukutty, Assoc. Prof. Dr. Chin Yit Siew,  
Dr. Roseline Yap Wai Kuan, Assist. Prof. Dr. Serene Tung En Hui,  
Ms. Noor Faezah Abdul Jalil and Emeritus Prof. Dr. Mohd Ismail Noor.
2.1 Terminology 
32 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Energy balance 
 
Energy balance is achieved when calorie-intake 
(food intake) is balanced with calorie expenditure 
(physical activity). Individuals gain weight when 
calorie or energy intake exceeded energy 
expenditure while,
 individuals lose weight when 
the energy expenditure exceeded the energy 
intake over a period of time.  
  
Body mass index (BMI) 
 
BMI is a simple index of weight-for-height that is 
commonly used to classify underweight, 
overweight and obesity in adults. It is de
ﬁned as 
the body weight in kilograms divided by the 
square of the height in meters (kg/m 2). However, 
BMI has its limitation. It does not distinguish 
between weight associated with muscle mass and 
weight associated with fat mass. Hence, BMI is not 
a direct measure of body fat, but it is more 
accurate in approximating body fat than 
measuring body weight alone. 
 
 
 
Waist circumference (WC) 
 
The circumference around the waist is measured 
by placing a measuring tape around the trunk 
between the lower costal margin and the iliac 
crest. It is an indication of body fat located at the 
abdominal region and is an independent predictor 
of risk factors and morbidity of obesity-related 
diseases. Abdominal obesity is deﬁned as 
WC ≥ 90 
cm for males and ≥ 80 cm for females. 
 
Body composition 
 
Body composition measurements are objective 
methods of nutritional assessment. The 
assessment of body composition provides insights 
into both nutritional status and functional capacity 
of the human body that is useful in nutrition for 
describing growth and development from birth 
through to adulthood. Body composition is a 
method of describing what the body is made of 
that is fat,
 protein, minerals and water. It also 
describes body weight more accurately than BMI. 
Body composition analysis can accurately show 
changes in fat mass, muscle mass, and body fat 
percentage. A range of techniques [skin-folds, 
33Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA), dual-
energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) and stable 
isotopes] allow for the measurement of fat, fat-free 
mass, bone mineral content, total body water, 
extracellular water, total adipose tissue and its 
sub-depots (visceral, subcutaneous, and inter-
muscular), skeletal muscle, selected organs, and 
ectopic fat depots. 
 
Healthy body weight 
 
Healthy body weight refers to appropriate body 
weight in relation to height whereby BMI in the 
normal range category is between 18.5 to 24.9 
kg/m
2. 
 
Body image 
 
Body image refers to the perception that a person 
has of their physical self,
 and the thoughts and 
feelings that result from that perception. An 
individual with negative body image may have 
body size dissatisfaction, have incorrect 
perception of body weight status, involve in body 
change strategies in order to achieve the ideal 
body image. 
 
Nutrient-dense foods 
 
Foods rich in nutrients but relatively low in 
calories/ energy. Nutrient-dense foods contain 
vitamins,
 minerals, complex carbohydrates, 
protein, and healthy fats. Examples includes fruits 
and vegetables, whole grains, ﬁ sh/ seafood, lean 
meats, legumes, nuts and seeds. 
 
Energy (calorie)-dense foods 
 
Energy (calorie)-dense foods are usually processed 
foods, which are high in calories because they 
contain large amounts of fat or sugar
. Examples 
include fast foods (fries, burger), cakes, chips and 
local kuih. 
Eating disorders 
 
Eating disorders are characterised by a persistent 
cognitive distortion related to food and body 
weight and disturbed eating patterns and is 
deﬁned by the clinical criteria in Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) 
(APA,
 2013). The DSM-5 includes the following 
diagnostic categories: anorexia nervosa (AN), 
bulimia nervosa (BN), binge eating disorder (BED) 
and other speciﬁ ed feeding of eating disorder 
(OSFED).  
 
Disordered eating 
 
Disordered eating refers to a constellation of 
unhealthy eating and weight related attitudes and 
behaviours that do not meet the criteria for an 
eating disorder,
 but that have medical and/ or 
psychological consequences. Disordered eating 
includes restrained eating, binge eating, purgative 
practices and other unhealthy methods to lose or 
control weight. 
 
Restrained eating 
 
Restrained eating refers to the intention to control 
food intake for weight maintenance either weight 
gain or loss. 
 
Fad diet 
 
Fad diets are usually very-low-calorie diets and 
promote a single type of food that can lead to 
nutrient de
ﬁciencies. They can lead to quick 
weight loss and may also lead to quick weight re-
gain.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

34 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
2.2 Introduction  
Body weight is an important anthropometric 
measurement to determine the nutritional risk and status 
of an individual. Unhealthy weight status is a form of 
malnutrition which comprises both underweight (UW) 
and overweight/ obesity (OW/ OB). Individual’s weight 
status can be classiﬁed using body mass index (BMI). In 
addition, BMI is usually complemented together with 
waist circumference measurement, including body 
composition analysis of body fat percentage. Waist 
circumference is used as an indicator for abdominal 
obesity while BMI is often positively correlated with body 
fat percentage. Globally, there is approximately 2 billion 
OW/ OB adults compared to only 462 million UW adults 
(WHO, 2018). In Malaysia, the prevalence of overweight 
and obesity in adults is much higher that is 50.1% 
compared to the prevalence of underweight of 6.5% (IPH, 
2020). 
 
Body weight is regulated by the concept of energy input 
and energy output. Unhealthy weight status is usually 
described as the consequence of imbalance energy input 
from dietary intake and energy output/ energy 
expenditure via physical activity and exercise. When 
energy input/ calories (IN) consistently exceeds energy 
output/ calories (OUT) over a period of time, it will lead to 
weight gain contributing to OW/ OB; while the reverse, in 
which when energy output/ calories (OUT) exceeds 
energy input/ calories (IN), it will lead to weight loss 
contributing to UW (WHO, 1998). 
 
Even though the energy imbalance concept may seem 
straightforward in describing unhealthy weight status, 
the aetiology contributing to OW/ OB and UW is rather 
complex, involving the interactions of various factors such 
as genetics, physiological and metabolism, psychological 
and behavioural including environmental factors (WHO, 
1998). 
 
The prevalence of UW or low body weight globally is 
shown to be lower compared to the extreme end of OW/ 
OB. However, it is still a nutritional problem which could 
affect the health status of individuals including mortality. 
The major consequence of UW is nutritional deﬁciencies 
such as energy, protein, iron, calcium, which could lead to 
poor growth and development and weaken immune 
system, including higher risk of clinical and chronic 
conditions/ diseases such as anaemia and osteopenia/ 
osteoporosis. In terms of the different stages of human life 
cycle, toddlers and teenagers/ young adults especially 
females could be more prone to the problem of UW. The 
possible reasons could be due to ‘picky eating’ which 
usually occurs during toddlerhood while in female 
teenagers and young adults, it could be due to the 
negative body image and disordered eating. When UW 
problem persists, this may also lead to eating disorders 
such as anorexia and bulimia nervosa, which could result 
to a far bigger problem to solve than just nutrient 
deﬁciencies because it involves mental health. 
 
Overweight/ obesity is a global problem, which a ffects 
almost all stages of the human life cycle from infant to the 
older age population. OW/ OB is a risk factor for several 
chronic non-communicable diseases (NCDs) such as 
cardiovascular diseases, musculoskeletal disorders (e.g., 
osteoarthritis), some cancers (e.g., breast and colon 
cancers), and diabetes mellitus (WHO, 2018). James (2013) 
described obesity, a modern pandemic: the burden of 
disease and more recently, a position statement from the 
World Obesity Federation in 2017 has proposed obesity 
as a chronic relapsing progressive disease process (Bray, 
Kim & Wilding, 2017). With that, OB/ OW has contributed 
to an economic burden to the country due to the high 
healthcare costs associated with the management and 
treatment of this condition including its associated 
chronic NCDs and conditions. In Malaysia, the healthcare 
costs attributed from OW/ OB was estimated at USD 1.7 
billion in 2017 (WHO, 2019). In addition, OW/ OB may 
contribute to low labour productivity due to absence from 
work including the development of mental health 
problems such as depression and anxiety, which will 
further burden the country in the terms of economic 
costs. Furthermore, people with obesity commonly face a 
pervasive, resilient form of social stigma (Rubino et al., 
2020).  
35Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
According to WHO (2018), there are two main causes of 
OW/ OB, which are: 1) excessive intake of foods high in fat 
which are also energy-dense; and 2) sedentary lifestyle or 
low physical activity due to rapid urbanisation. Both of 
these causes are under behavioural and environmental 
factors. However, in Malaysia, the availability of foods at 
all times which promotes the eating out habit among 
Malaysians could be a possible factor related to food 
consumption/ environment factor, contributing to the 
positive energy balance. Fournier et al. (2016) reported 
BMI issue in Malaysia and investigated its relationships 
with the socio-demographic characteristics of the 
population, as well as their eating patterns using a 
Malaysian Food Barometer model. They found about 64% 
of Malaysians had at least one meal per day outside of 
home, 23.4% had meals at home, and 12.5% will eat at 
home with outside food. In terms of physical inactivity 
among Malaysian adults, the latest ﬁndings from NHMS 
2019 indicated a prevalence of 25.1% (IPH, 2020) while the 
MANS 2014 reported a slightly higher prevalence of 37% 
for physical inactivity (IPH, 2014).  
 
National surveys over the last two decades revealed a 
high prevalence of unhealthy weight status especially 
OW/ OB in Malaysian population; therefore, it is utmost 
important for Malaysians at all life stages to maintain 
body weight in a healthy range (NCCFN, 2010). This will 
reduce and prevent the increasing prevalence of diet-
related chronic diseases in Malaysia. This key message is 
in line with the enabling strategy 4 of the current National 
Plan of Action for Nutrition of Malaysia (NPANM III), 2016-
2025 that is, preventing and controlling obesity and other 
diet-related non-communicable diseases (NCCFN, 2016) 
and provides key recommendations including guidelines 
on how to achieve the recommendations for achieving 
and maintaining healthy body weight of Malaysians.  
2.3 Scientiﬁc basis 
 
An unhealthy weight is often seen as a result of individual 
choice on diet, exercise and lifestyle. Maintenance of 
normal body weight in the current obesogenic 
environment is challenging for many individuals. This is 
further illustrated in Figure 2.1 which describes the 
existence of a complex web involving societal and 
biological factors that have, in recent decades expose our 
inherent vulnerability to weight gain and obesity. 
 
The risk of developing obesity-related co-morbidities rises 
exponentially with increasing BMI over 30 kg/m
2 as 
shown in Figure 2.2 (WHO, 2000). On the other hand, fat 
accumulation intra-abdominally and subcutaneously 
around the abdomen (central, abdominal, visceral, android, 
upper body or apple-shaped obesity) is also associated 
with higher risk for cardiometabolic diseases, 
independent of BMI (Cameron, Magliano & Soderberg, 
2013). However, fat accumulation in the subcutaneous 
regions of hips, thighs and lower trunk (gluteo-femoral, 
peripheral, gynoid, lower body or pear-shaped obesity) is 
considered less harmful or even protective against 
cardiometabolic complications (Manolopoulos, Karpe & 
Frayn, 2010;  Cameron, Magliano & Soderberg, 2013; 
Kwon, Kim & Kim, 2017)   
 
The World Obesity Federation has declared that obesity is 
a disease (Bray, Kim & Wilding, 2017), while The Obesity 
Society has put a statement on obesity as a chronic 
disease (Jastreboff  et al., 2019).  Notably, the chronic 
diseases have been shown to have strong correlations 
with BMI (WHO/ IASO/ IOTF, 2000), while Calle et al. 
(1999) have shown the correlation of BMI and mortality in 
Figure 2.2 (Kyrou et al., 2018). 
 
36 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Figure 2.1: Tackling Obesities: Future Choices, Foresight Report 
Source: Butland et al. (2007). 
Figure 5.2: The full obesity system map with thematic clusters (see main text 5.1.2 for discussion) 17,18 9DULDEOHVDUHUHSUHVHQWHGE\ER[HVSRVLWLYHFDXVDOUHODWLRQVKLSVDUH
UHSUHVHQWHGE\VROLGDUURZVDQGQHJDWLYHUHODWLRQVKLSVE\GRWWHGOLQHV7KHFHQWUDOHQJLQHLVKLJKOLJKWHGLQRUDQJHDWWKHFHQWUHRIWKHPDS
37Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
The escalating pandemics of obesity and sedentary 
lifestyle leads to much higher risk of premature death and 
many serious disorders, including diabetes mellitus, 
hypertension, dyslipidaemia, cardiovascular disease, 
stroke, gallbladder disease, respiratory dysfunction, gout, 
osteoarthritis and certain types of cancer as shown in 
Figure 2.3 (Bray, Kim & Wilding, 2017).  
 
Besides a major risk factor for chronic diet-related 
diseases or non-communicable diseases (NCDs) 
mentioned above, overweight and obesity may contribute 
as a risk factor for infectious diseases such as the current 
pandemic of COVID-19, which arose late in 2019 and 
increasing rapidly in the number of cases globally. This is 
shown from arising data which indicated an possible 
positive association between overweight and obese 
individuals including those with chronic NCDs with high 
risk of being infected by the COVID-19 virus  (Ricardo et 
al., 2020; Popkin et al., 2020). The possible reason is due to 
the weaker immune system in individuals who are 
overweight or obese and with chronic NCDs as compared 
to healthy individuals (Katzmarzyk et al., 2020). Hence, 
obesity and other chronic diseases can inﬂ uence the 
severity and mortality of COVID-19 patients admitted for 
treatment in the hospitals. 
 
A systematic and appropriate weight management is 
required to attain and maintain healthy body weight for 
minimising the risk of developing chronic diseases in 
adults of any age. Maintaining a healthy weight 
throughout childhood may reduce the risk of becoming 
an OW/ OB adult. Adult individuals who are overweight or 
obese will beneﬁ t from modest amount of weight loss; 
therefore, prevention of further weight gain is important.  
Figure 2.2: Relationships between Body Mass Index (BMI) and mortality  
Source: Calle et al. (1999) & Kyrou et al. (2018) 
Figure 2.3: A model showing the relation of obesity in the centre and the diseases with which it is associated Source: Bray, Kim & 
Wilding (2017) 
Diabetes
Mellitus
Breast / Endometrial
Cancer
Cardiovascular
Disease
Insulin
Resistance
Increased Pharyngeal
Fat Depots
Increased
Body Mass
Increased
Visibility
Sleep Apnea
Osteoarthritis Stigma
Insulin
Estradiol
ObesityCholesterol
Turnover
Increased Blood
Volume & High
Angiotensinogen
High Blood
Pressure
Cholesterol
Gallstones
Inflammation &
Dyslipidemia
38 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Ideally, weight management should start from childhood. 
However, for adults, weight loss, should be set realistically 
at 10% reduction from the baseline body weight within 6 
months of intervention or treatment (MASO/ AAM/ 
MEMS, 2004). Weight loss is associated with 
improvement in related co-morbidities. Therefore, OW/ 
OB individual should set target for achieving healthy body 
weight goal with the support of health care professionals 
that includes nutritionist, dietitian, clinical psychologist, 
physician, and exercise therapist. Weight loss could be 
achieved with proper management of food intake (energy 
intake) and physical activity (energy expenditure).  
 
Between the years 1994 to 2001, numerous studies related 
to basal metabolic rate (BMR), total daily energy 
expenditure (TDEE) and physical activity level (PAL) in 
various population groups of both sexes (adults, the 
Armed Forces and Elite athletes) were reported (Table 
2.3). The overall results revealed that with the exception 
of the Armed Forces and Elite athletes, all other age-
groups led a sedentary lifestyle with PAL values in males 
(1.50-1.68) and females (1.48-1.70) which did not meet the 
WHO recommended PAL values of 1.75 for moderate 
activity (Ismail, 2001).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.3.1 Measures of body weight/ body fat 
  
2.3.1.1 Body mass index
 
 
One of the most commonly used indices of relative weight 
is the body mass index (BMI). BMI is not a direct measure 
of body fat, but it is more accurate at approximating body 
fat than measuring body weight alone
. BMI can be 
considered to provide the most useful, albeit crude, 
population-level measure of obesity.  
 
Measuring body weight is important for assessing body 
composition and for monitoring the changes in weight 
either gain or loss. Calibration is needed for both the 
weighing scale and stadiometer when measuring BMI. 
Calibration of instruments is diff erent from model to 
model and manufacturer to manufacturer. However, it is 
a simple procedure described in the user’s manual which 
comes with the instrument. In order to calibrate the 
weighing scale for accuracy of weighing scale, it is 
recommended to test against a known object on the 
weighing scale.  
 
A Technical Committee initiated by the Malaysian 
Association for the Study of Obesity (MASO, 2005) 
recommends retaining the current WHO classiﬁcation of 
BMI (WHO, 1998) for adults and acknowledges the need 
to have the public health action points as recommended 
by WHO Expert Consultations 2004 (Table 2.1). 
 
Table 2.1: Body weight classification of adults according to BMI and public health action for Malaysia 
Body weight 
classification
BMI cut off points  
for definition1 
(kg/m2)
Risk of  
co-morbidities
BMI cut-off points for  
public health action2  
(kg/m2)
Underweight <18.5 <18.5  
 
Normal 18.5 to 24.9 Low 18.5 to 22.9  
 
Overweight ≥ 25.0 23.0 to 27.4 
 
Pre-obesity 25.0 to 29.9 Moderate 27.5 to 32.4 
 
Obesity Class I 30.0 to 34.9 High 32.5 to 37.4  
 
Obesity Class II 35.0 to 39.9 Very high ≥ 37.5 
 
Obesity Class III ≥ 40.0
Source: 1WHO (1998), 2WHO (2004) 
39Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Some scientiﬁc evidences suggest that Asian populations 
have different associations between BMI, percentage of 
body fat and health risks than do European populations 
(Ko et al., 1999; Deurenberg et al., 2001; Zhou, 2002). A 
WHO expert consultation had addressed the debate 
about interpretation of recommended body mass index 
(BMI) cut-off points for determining OW/ OB in Asian 
populations and considered whether population-speciﬁc 
cut-off points for BMI are necessary. The WHO 
consultation group agreed that the WHO BMI cut-o ff 
points should be retained as international classiﬁcations 
(WHO, 2004).  
 
Reducing BMI cut-off values for action on OW/ OB would 
increase their prevalence rates overnight; and therefore, 
increase governmental and public awareness. However, 
such a change would require public health policies and 
clinical management guidelines to be changed and could 
lead to increased costs for governments (such as more 
treatment at lower thresholds). 
 
 The Committee (MASO, 2005) acknowledges the need to 
have additional trigger points for public health action. 
These were identiﬁed as 23 kg/m
2 or higher, representing 
increased risk and 27.5 kg/m2 or higher representing high 
risk as recommended by the WHO consultation (WHO, 
2004). 
 
A low body weight (BMI < 18.5 kg/m
2) is associated with 
a low risk of chronic diseases. However, a low body 
weight is unhealthy because it increases the risk of other 
clinical conditions such as anaemia and low bone mass. 
It also leads to distortion of body image amongst 
teenagers and young adults and increased risk of eating 
disorders namely anorexia and bulimia. A low BMI is 
associated with greater mortality risk than that of normal 
individuals (Di Angelantonio et al., 2016; Klatsky et al., 
2017). Hence, the healthy weight range for adults is 
deﬁned as having a BMI range of 18.5 to 24.9 kg/m
2. The 
BMI however is not suitable for use in pregnant women.  
 
 
2.3.1.2 W
aist circumference  
 
Body fat located at the abdominal region is associated 
with greater health risk than peripheral fat. Excess 
abdominal fat is an independent predictor of risk factors 
and morbidity of obesity-related diseases such as type 2 
diabetes, hypertension,
 dyslipidaemia and cardiovascular 
diseases (WHO, 1998).   
 
Waist circumference is positively correlated with 
abdominal fat. Waist circumference has been shown in 
large epidemiological studies to be strongly, signiﬁcantly 
and independently correlated with blood pressure, 
dyslipidaemia, fasting plasma glucose, 2-hours plasma 
glucose and/ or diabetes (Zhou, 2002). Therefore, it is a 
valuable additional alternative method for identifying 
individuals at increased risk of chronic diseases.  
 
Waist circumference is a convenient measurement which 
is unrelated to height and correlates with BMI. For 
Malaysians, MASO/ AMM/ MEMS (2004) proposed waist 
circumference cut-off  points as recommended by the 
WHO/ IASO/ IOTF (2000) as shown in Table 2.2. Ideally, 
the goal for adults would be to maintain body weight 
within normal BMI and to have waist circumferences 
below the cut-off  points recommended according to 
gender.  
 
Men Women
< 90 cm (35 inches)Waist circumference < 80 cm (32 inches)
Table 2.2: Waist circumference cut-off points 
Source: WHO/IASO/IOTF (2000) 

40 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
2.3.1.3 Body composition 
 
Despite the simplicity of the use of body mass index 
(BMI), there are limitations of BMI as indicators of 
cardiovascular disease risk. F
or instance, body weight is 
not suitable for the measure of ideal body composition 
when relating to ﬁ tness as increase in weight due to 
increase in fat-free mass (FFM) can be misinterpreted as 
increase in body fatness. With this reason, caution is 
needed when these indices are applied and used on 
athletes (Kruschitz et al., 2013).  
 
The rise in the prevalence of obesity across all ages in 
Malaysia (IPH, 2015; IPH 2017; IPH, 2020) highlights the 
importance of body composition assessment as indicators 
of cardiometabolic risk (Amato, Guarnotta & Giordano, 
2013). The distribution of body fat and fat free mass (FFM) 
are associated with various health outcomes in infancy, 
childhood and later adulthood. Some of the measures of 
body composition include skinfold thickness (i.e., trunk, 
thighs, shoulder blade, and triceps), bioelectrical 
impedance, underwater weighing (densitometry) and dual 
energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) (Burkhauser & 
Cawley, 2008; Ozhan et al., 2012; Wang, Chen & Eitzman, 
2014). However, it is important to address the complexity 
and cost of the body composition assessment for the use 
of epidemiological studies (Wells & Fewtrell, 2006). 
Nevertheless, it is best to evaluate body composition for 
the monitoring of changes resulting from weight 
management interventions in this population.  
 
 
2.3.2 Weight management strategies and 
concerns 
 
2.3.2.1 W
eight management  
 
Weight management can be achieved when energy 
intake (food intake) is balanced with energy expenditure 
(physical activity). Obesity develops when energy intake 
exceeds energy expenditure over time; excess energy is 
stored in adipose tissue
, and chronic excess leads to 
greater adiposity. The changes on body weight mass in 
accordance to the laws of thermodynamics and the 
preservation of energy, whereby even small but persistent 
deviations from energy balance, which may arise from 
altered energy expenditure or energy intake and which 
lead to sustained positive or negative energy balance 
states (Piaggi, 2019). It is also evident that metabolisable 
energy (feacal energy) can inﬂuence human body weight 
regulation (Lund, Gerhart-Hines & Clemmensen, 2020).  
 
Balanced diet that meets nutrient needs is able to prevent 
weight gain and have a desirable body weight. The 
amount of calories consumed must be within the 
individual’s requirement. Energy requirement is 
determined by age, gender and physical activity level. The 
Recommended Nutrient Intake (RNI) for Malaysia 
(NCCFN, 2017) has recommended intake of 50-65% 
energy from carbohydrates, 10-20% energy from proteins 
and limit energy from fats between 25-30% are able to 
reduce the risk of chronic disease, overweight and 
obesity. 
Macronutrients (carbohydrates, proteins and fats) 
contribute to dietary energy intake. Fat contributes 
signiﬁcantly to the caloric content of foods because it 
provides twice the calories per gram compared to 
carbohydrate and protein. High sugary foods also 
increase the calorie content of foods and drinks. Eating 
foods with lower calories may be helpful to reduce energy 
intake to maintain weight. Individuals should limit the 
portion size eaten, especially foods that are energy-dense 
to help control calorie intake. Besides diet, regular 
physical activity is important to maintain weight in the 
healthy range.  
 
Combination of balanced diet and physical activity have 
better results in weight reduction. Moderate to vigorous 
intensity of physical activity or exercise preferably spread 
throughout the week, is good for weight management. 
For further information on the physical activity or exercise, 
please refer to Key Message 3 for the Malaysia Physical 
Activity Pyramid (pg 65).  
 
 
2.3.2.2 Weight gain 
 
In simple term, underweight refers to body weight that is 
too low for a normal healthy individual
. Individuals who 
are severely underweight or have chronic energy 
deﬁciency (CED) often have a poor nutrition status and 
are prone to infections, anaemia, low immune status, low 
bone mass and difficulty to recover from illnesses. Weight 
gainers need to set realistic targets. However, the weight 
gain should not exceed the recommended healthy weight 
range according to their height (BMI 18.5 to 24.9 kg/m
2). 
Some individuals may gain weight faster than others, 
especially if there is a genetic predisposition to obesity. 
Underweight is unhealthy weight arising from 
unintentional weight loss from many causes especially 
poor food intake.  
 
The principles of energy homeostasis explains that 
weight gain can only be achieved with a persistent state 
of positive energy balance, e.g., overeating sustained to a 
degree that constantly exceeds daily energy expenditure 
(Piaggi et al., 2018). It is important to eat consistently and 
have more frequent meals. Eat at least three main meals 
and one to three additional snacks. Skipping meals will 
cause missing out of important calories and other 
nutrients needed to accomplish the goal.  
 
High caloric and nutritious food and beverages fed in 
small portions, at a slow pace to avoid re-feeding 
syndrome is the best approach to reverse underweight 
(Uzogara, 2016). In addition to feeding, strength-training 
exercises that build muscle, frequent rest and good sleep, 
healthier lifestyle (cessation of smoking, alcohol) and 
behaviour modiﬁ cation also can help in underweight 
management (Uzogara, 2016).  
 
Eating a larger than normal portion of food will help 
increase energy intake. For example, having a bigger bowl 
of breakfast cereal, two sandwiches instead of one for 
snacks, a bigger serving of rice at lunch or dinner, drinking 
a bigger glass of fruit juice or milk and eating a larger 
41Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
piece of fruit. Individuals who wish to gain weight should 
select nutrient-rich and calorie-dense foods as shown in 
Table 2.4. Beverages such as juices and milk-based 
beverages are simple ways to increase caloric intake. One 
common misconception is that the best way to build 
muscle or “bulk up” is to eat a high-protein diet. 
Adequate protein intake is essential for muscle growth. 
However, most of the calories needed to fuel muscle 
growth come from carbohydrates and fat. Hence, eating a 
balanced proportion of macronutrients (carbohydrates, 
protein and fats) but at increased total calories with 
frequent meal is recommended for weight gain.  
 
In recent years, a new public health nutrition strategy in 
maintaining healthy eating is avoiding the ultra-
processed foods (Gibney, 2018). The high calories 
contributed from the ultra-processed foods has linked to 
NCDs (Machado et al., 2019). In a systematic and meta-
analysis review found that consumption of ultra-
processed food was associated with increased risk of 
overweight, obesity, abdominal obesity, all-cause 
mortality, metabolic syndrome and depression in adults. 
In addition, consumption of ultra-processed food was 
associated with cardiometabolic diseases, frailty, irritable 
bowel syndrome, functional dyspepsia and cancer (breast 
and overall) in adults (Lane et al, 2020) 
 
Strengthening exercises such as weight lifting, push-ups 
help to stimulate muscular development and increase 
weight gain (refer to Key Message 3 for Physical Activity 
Pyramid for strengthening exercises).  Exercise tends to 
stimulate the appetite in the long term (Schubert et al., 
2014; Hunschede et al., 2017) and increases thirst. This 
will help individuals to eat and drink more.  
 
 
2.3.2.3 Weight reduction 
 
There is strong evidence that weight loss promotes lower 
blood pressure ,
 lipid levels and glucose levels in 
overweight and obese individuals with hypertension, 
dyslipidaemia or diabetes (Jensen et al., 2014; Steinberg 
et al., 2015; Painter et al., 2017; CDC 2017; LeBlanc et al., 
2018).  
 
 
 
 
Individuals who are overweight or obese should attempt 
to lose weight gradually by 5-10% of their initial body 
weight. The beneﬁ ts of 10% weight loss are shown in 
Table 2.5. The therapeutic of weight loss on metabolic 
function in obesity individual are shown in the Figure 2.4. 
If able to reduce body weight, the individual can attempt 
for further weight loss; however, a body composition 
assessment is required. 
 
A reasonable timeline for 5-10% weight loss is three to six 
months, with a safe weight loss of 1/2 to 1 kg per week 
has shown to improve health outcomes (Magkos et al., 
2016; Varkevisser et al., 2019). This usually means a 
reduction of calorie intake by 500 to 1000 kcal/ day. A 
sound long-term weight loss plan includes a reduction in 
calorie intake, intake of the recommended amounts of 
nutrients and increased physical activity. A calorie-
controlled and balanced diet, along with regular physical 
activity is the best choice for weight loss (Miller et al., 
2013; Annesi et al., 2016; Villareal et al., 2017). For further 
information of type of exercises and duration, please refer 
to Key Message 3 for Malaysia Physical Activity Pyramid 
(pg 65).  
 
When it comes to weight loss diets, it is calories that 
count. A systematic review has shown the macronutrient 
of diets are not as important as overall calorie deﬁ cit 
(Bravata et al., 2003) in inducing weight loss. The weight 
loss diet should have a balanced proportion of 
carbohydrates (50% to 65%), protein (10% to 20%) and fats 
(25% to 30%). Diets that provide very low or very high 
amounts of protein, carbohydrates or fat are likely to 
provide low amounts of some nutrients and are not 
advisable for long term use. Although these diets have 
been shown to result in weight reduction, the 
maintenance of the weight lost ultimately will depend on 
change in lifestyle.  
 
Individuals on a weight loss diet should limit portion size 
of foods eaten, especially foods that are energy dense to 
help reduce calorie intake. Fats are the most concentrated 
source of energy, hence limiting high fat foods would help 
reduce calorie intake. A randomised study has 
demonstrated that moderate 5% weight loss improves 
metabolic function in multiple organs simultaneously, and 
progressive weight loss causes dose-dependent 
alterations in key adipose tissue biological pathways 
(Magkos et al., 2016) (Figure 2.4). 
42 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Figure 2.4: Therapeutic effects of weight loss on metabolic function 
Source: Magkos et al. (2016) 
Meta-analysis provides further evidence that whole grain 
intake is associated with a reduced risk of chronic 
diseases (Aune et al., 2016) and these ﬁndings are in line 
with national dietary guidelines that promote and 
recommend increase intake of whole grains in order to 
prevent chronic diseases and weight management. 
Hence, intake of diet high in dietary ﬁ bre and low in fat 
such as whole grain cereals, vegetables and moderate 
amounts of fruits can help in preventing chronic diseases 
and weight management. Healthier cooking methods to 
reduce to fat such as steaming, grilling, stir-frying and 
clear soups, rather than deep-frying are also beneﬁcial in 
weight reduction. 
 
Besides a reduction in calorie intake, increasing physical 
activity is essential for successful weight loss and to avoid 
weight regain.  Regular physical activity in combination 
of diet restriction can assist in weight maintenance. 
Energy intake inﬂ uences energy expenditure in a 
dynamic way, whereby when a person’s food intake is 
reduced for weight control, all components of energy 
expenditure change that includes the metabolic rate at 
rest (resting energy expenditure (REE), metabolic rate of 
exercise and adaptive thermogenesis (Yoo, 2018). 
However, exercise may not be the only method to control 
weight and manage obesity (King et al., 2012). 
 
  
2.3.2.4 Self-monitoring 
 
Self-monitoring is an important behavioural approach 
towards better control of body weight. Self-monitoring is 
commonly used in weight-loss regimens to increase 
awareness of current and desired behaviours which 
incorporate self-monitoring technology through mobile 
phone apps, smart scales,
 and other wearable devices into 
their weight-loss programmes (Painter et al., 2017). 
Overweight and obese individuals who practise daily self-
weighing have been found to successfully lose weight 
and able to maintain the weight loss over a longer period 
of time compared to those who do not weigh themselves 
frequently (Carels et al., 2008; Steinberg et al., 2015). 
 
Although there is emerging evidence that daily weighing 
can promote greater weight loss compared to less 
frequent weighing (Vanwormer et al., 2008; Steinberg et 
al., 2013), the mechanisms are unclear. Nevertheless, self-
weighing helps the individual to adopt a lifestyle change 
in behaviour (diet and/ or exercise) mainly to prevent 
further weight gain or losses. Hence, adults should 
monitor and weigh themselves at least once a week to 
maintain a healthy body weight.  
 
 
2.3.2.5 Fad diets  
 
Fad diets are popular diet plans that claim to reduce one’
s 
weight rapidly in a short period of time. These diets are 
usually unhealthy and in long-term practice can likely 
contribute to side effects in the human health (Omar et 
al., 2019). The rapid weight reduction is due to the loss of 
water and muscle instead of fat, while low calories intake 
may contribute to constipation, insufficient energy intake 
and nutrients, and fatigue (Khawandanah & Tewﬁk, 2016). 
Fad diets are typically based on two main characteristics 
- intake of macronutrients in particular percentage or 
omitting or taking in particular foods (Saltsman, 
Thomason & Roberts, 2001). Fad diets typically diff er 
dramatically from the recommended intake of 
macronutrient as the source of energy in a diet which is 
approximately 50-65% from carbohydrates, 10-20% from 
protein and ≤ 30% from fat (NCCFN, 2017).  
43Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Numerous weight loss diet plans emerged in the past 
decade and can mainly be categorised as - Very low-
calorie diet (VLCD), low fat diet, high ﬁ bre diet, high 
protein diet, and low carbohydrate diet. Some of these 
diet plans are similar in their compositions, largely made 
of a combination of high carbohydrates, low fat or 
moderate fat (Omar et al., 2019). The VLCD plan is deﬁned 
as a diet plan that restrict energy intake to less than 800 
kcal/day (Khawandanah & Tewﬁ k, 2016). Examples of 
VLCD plan are Cambridge Diet, Rotation Diet, Liquid 
formula Diet (400 to 500 kcal/day), Grapefruit Diet (< 800 
kcal/day) and the Human Chorionic Gonadotropin (HCG) 
Diet (500 kcal/day) (Navaro et al., 2017). All these VLCD 
plans have to be practised with caution as the self-
restriction of energy intake poses adverse eff ects to 
health, including anaemia, gallstone formation, decrease 
in lean body mass, ketosis, inadequacy of micronutrients, 
tiredness, and weakness as well as dizziness (Johansson 
et al., 2013; Khawandanah & Tewﬁk, 2016). The formation 
of gallstone in VLCD individuals is three times higher than 
low-calorie diet counterparts (Gudzune et al., 2015). 
Further, those on VLCD plan may face diffi culties in 
getting back to regular and balanced diet (Bray et al., 
2018). 
 
For very low-fat diet plans such as Pritikin Diet and Pasta 
Diet, the fat intake is ≤ 15% of total energy intake whereby 
saturated, monounsaturated, and polyunsaturated fatty 
acids are consumed in balance within the 15% of fat 
intake. The proteins account for 15% of the total energy 
intake while carbohydrates account for ≥  70% of the 
calorie intake (Lichtenstein & Van Horn, 1998). As the fat 
intake is restricted, some of the very-low-fat diet plans 
may limit the consumption of seafood, low-fat dairy, and 
poultry which are considered as important sources of 
protein and calcium (Bray et al., 2018). Pritikin Diet limits 
the fat intake to less than 10% of total energy intake and 
it is almost the lowest limit of the essential fatty acids 
daily requirement. As Pritikin Diet emphasised on the 
high carbohydrate intake, nutrient deﬁ ciencies such as 
fat-soluble vitamins and minerals such as calcium and 
zinc, as well as protein, may occur. In addition, the low-fat 
diet contributes to iron deﬁ ciency and further causes 
anaemia as well as amenorrhea (Khawandanah & Tewﬁk, 
2016). 
 
A low carbohydrate diet plan is deﬁned as diet restrict to 
less than 130 g of carbohydrate intake per day or 
carbohydrate intake of less than 26% total energy 
expenditure. Moreover, a very low carbohydrate or 
ketogenic diet is deﬁ ned as diet restrict to 20-50 g of 
carbohydrate intake per day or carbohydrate intake of less 
than or equal to 10% total energy expenditure (Dyson, 
2015; Noakes & Windt, 2017). A low carbohydrate diet 
plan is usually high in fat and protein (Dyson, 2015; Oh & 
Uppaluri, 2020). For example, Atkins Diet, which restricts 
the carbohydrate intake with no limits on protein and fat 
intakes, is one of the most popular very low carbohydrate 
diet plans in weight management (Dyson, 2015; 
Khawandanah & Tewﬁk, 2016). Besides Atkins Diet, South 
Beach and the Zone diet plans are the examples of ‘high-
protein’ diet, which differ in terms of carbohydrate and fat 
ratios (Atallah et al., 2014). Recently, there is very low 
carbohydrate diet plan known as very low-calorie 
ketogenic (VLCK: 600-800 kcal/day) diet, which are low 
in carbohydrates (< 50 g daily from vegetables), and lipids 
(10 g/day of olive oil) (Muscogiuri et al., 2019). The VLCK 
Diet preserves the body muscle and strength at the same 
time maintains the resting metabolic rate (RMR), while 
decreases the body fat mass in treating the obese patient 
(Gomez-Arbelaez et al., 2018). 
 
A low carbohydrate diet may lead to long term adverse 
health effects on renal function due to high protein intake, 
higher risk of osteoporosis due to ketosis that promotes 
urinary calcium loss, as well as micronutrients deﬁciency 
especially thiamine, folic acid, vitamin C, iron and 
magnesium (Dyson, 2015; Wyka et al., 2015). In addition, 
low carbohydrate diets have higher risk for lower 
gastrointestinal disorder and CVD (Dyson, 2015), while 
high protein diets may cause formation of kidney stones 
and damage to blood vessels which could lead to 
arteriosclerosis (Wyka et al., 2015).   
 
Paleolithic Diet (Paleo diet) or Caveman Diet, or Stone-
Age Diet is a high ﬁ bre diet plan based on foods 
consumed during the Old Stone Age (Konner & Eaton, 
2010). In other words, Palaeolithic Diet is an ancestral way 
of eating that emphasised on foods such as nuts, roots, 
lean meat, organ meat and a high proportion of fruits and 
vegetables; however, it excludes grains, legumes and 
dairy products (Genoni et al., 2019) as well as reﬁ ned 
sugar, processed oil, and salt (Manousou et al., 2017). The 
limitation of salt and dairy in Palaeolithic Diet increases 
the risk of iodine deﬁciency, including countries with salt 
iodisation program (Manousou et al., 2017). Besides, the 
limitation of grains and dairy may limit the intake of 
nutrients such as ﬁ bre, vitamin D, calcium, thiamine, 
riboﬂavin and iron (Berggren et al., 2018). A recent 
systematic review and meta-analysis by Ghaedi 
et al. 
(2019) revealed that a Palaeolithic Diet may be associated 
with preventing cardiovascular disease risks, but the 
evidence is not conclusive and more well-designed trials 
are still needed. 
 
Studies showed that fad diet results in weight loss due to 
the restriction of calories intake instead of its functional 
food properties. Hence, more studies should be conducted 
in order to have a safe-to-consume and nutritional-
sufficient dietary plan with the addition of bioactive 
ingredients that work on weight loss (Navaro et al., 2017). 
In order to maintain body weight resulting from a weight 
loss regime, it is important for a person to combine both 
exercise and dietary intervention (Headland et al., 2016). 
44 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
2.3.2.6 Body image disturbance and disordered eating behaviours  
Body image is deﬁned as the perception that a person has 
of their physical self,
 and the thoughts and feelings that 
result from that perception (Cash, 2004). Those who have 
negative body image are preoccupied with thinness, 
dissatisﬁed with various parts of their body parts, and/ or 
had perceived their body weight status incorrectly, as 
well as modifying their eating and exercise behaviours in 
order to achieve the ideal body image (Kamaria et al., 
2016; McGuinness & Taylor, 2016).  
 
Disordered eating is referred to a constellation of 
unhealthy eating and weight related attitudes and 
behaviours that do not meet the criteria for an eating 
disorder, but have medical and/ or psychological 
consequences (Ackard, 2004). Disordered eating 
behaviours include dieting, severe food restriction, 
bingeing, purgative practices, and other unhealthy 
methods to lose or control weight (Pereira & Alvarenga, 
2007; APA, 2013). Further, the co-existence of negative 
body image and disordered eating behaviours is reported 
in Malaysia, particularly during adolescence and young 
adulthood (Chong et. al., 2017; Nur Nabilla et al., 2019; 
Chin et al., 2020) that may lead to adulthood.  
  
The issues of negative body image and disordered eating 
behaviours are not limited to adolescents and young 
adults as studies have reported that midlife adults also do 
face body size dissatisfaction and disordered eating 
behaviours, whereby the issues were more common in 
females as compared to males (Forrester-Knauss & Zemp 
Stutz, 2012; McGuinness & Taylor, 2016). In addition, 
disordered eating behaviours predicts the development 
of a clinical eating disorder as well as weight gain over 
time which may lead to obesity (Nagata et al., 2018). 
Evidences have reported that unhealthy dieting 
behaviours may result to 5- to 18-fold risk of developing 
eating disorders, while professionally administered 
weight loss programmes do not increase the risk or 
symptoms of eating disorders (Peckmezian & Hay, 2017).  
While the populations are getting fatter overtime, the 
beauty standards for females are focused on thinness and 
slim while muscular are appreciated by males. This is 
known as cultural discontent, whereby one’s ideal beauty 
standard is inconsistent with his/ her actual body weight 
status. In order to achieve such ideal body image, one 
may develop negative body image such as body 
dissatisfaction and having incorrect perception of body 
weight status (Carraça et al., 2011; Kamaria, Vikram & 
Ayiesah, 2016). Furthermore, those who have negative 
body image would engage in dieting and unhealthful 
weight control behaviours, and they would be at risk of 
having disordered eating behaviours and obesity problem 
(Neumark-Sztainer et al., 2006). 
  
Body weight status inﬂ uences one’s body image and 
eating behaviours. Overweight and obese adults were 
found to be more likely to have negative body image and 
disordered eating than their counterparts (Carraça et al., 
2011; As-Sa’edi et al., 2013; Kamaria, Vikram & Ayiesah, 
2016; Sonneville et al., 2016; Nagata et al., 2018). For 
instance, overweight and obese individuals may engage 
in yo-yo dieting which also known as weight cycling, a 
pattern of losing weight and then regaining it back 
(Dulloo & Montani, 2015; Rhee, 2017). Yo-yo dieting is 
associated with an increased risk of eating disorders, 
obesity, and psychological problems such as anxiety and 
depression (Dulloo & Montani, 2015; Rhee, 2017; Quinn, 
Puhl & Reinka, 2020). 
  
Indeed, “feel fat” or perceiving oneself as overweight or 
obese, irrespective of their actual weight status, is 
associated with the engagement of various weight 
control behaviours and disordered eating behaviours, 
such as dieting, fasting, taking diet pills or laxatives, self-
induced vomiting, and binge eating (Sonneville et al., 
2016). In addition, self-perceived overweight was 
associated with more frequent weight loss attempts, but 
more likely to gain weight overtime (Robinson, Sutin & 
Daly, 2018). 
 
45Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
2.4 Current Status  
The unhealthy weight status of both underweight and 
overweight/ obesity still exists in Malaysian population 
with the latter being a far bigger problem compared to 
the former. In reference to the WHO (1998) classiﬁcations 
for BMI, the ﬁ ndings from the National Health and 
Morbidity Surveys (NHMS) in Malaysia for 2006, 2011, 
2015, and 2019 have shown a slight decrease in the 
prevalence of underweight (BMI < 18.5 kg/m
2) in adults 
aged 18 years and above from 2006 (8.5%) to 2019 (6.5%) 
with an overall total of less than 10%. However, based on 
the same surveys, the prevalence of both overweight and 
obesity (BMI > 24.9 kg/m
2) have increased over the years 
with the current prevalence of 50.1% in 2019 for combined 
overweight and obesity (Figure 2.5). 
 
In terms of risks based on socio-demographic properties 
such as gender, age, ethnicity, and locality, the following 
is current data from NHMS 2019.The prevalence of 
overweight was highest in males (30.8%) but the reverse 
was shown for obesity in which the prevalence for 
females was 24.7% (IPH, 2020). The middle age group of 
45-49 years old had the highest prevalence for overweight 
(39.6%) while the age group of 35-39 years old had the 
highest prevalence for obesity, 25.3% (IPH 2020). In terms 
of ethnic group, the prevalence of overweight was highest 
in Bumiputra Sabah (35.3%) while for obesity, the highest 
was among Indians (29.3%). As for locality, the prevalence 
of overweight was higher in urban areas (30.6%) but for 
obesity it was higher in rural areas, 19.8% (IPH, 2020). 
 
Besides weight status using BMI, it is also important to 
report on the current status for abdominal obesity, which 
correlates with body fat around the central and abdominal 
area of the human body. Based on NHMS 2019, the overall 
prevalence of abdominal obesity using the International 
Diabetes Institute/ Western Paciﬁ c World Health 
Organization/ International Association for the Study of 
Obesity/ International Obesity Task Force (WHO/ IASO/ 
IOTF, 2000) guidelines (waist circumference ≥ 90 cm for 
males and ≥ 80 cm for females) was 52.6% in Malaysian 
adults (IPH, 2020). The highest prevalence was found in 
females (64.8%), age group of 60-64 years old (71.5%), 
among Indians (68.3%) and in urban areas, 53.1% (IPH, 
2020). 
Figure 2.5: Prevalence of overweight and obesity in Malaysian adults based on NHMS 1996, 2006, 2011, 2015, 
and 2019 
Source: Lim et al. (2000); IPH (2008, 2011, 2015 & 2020)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Prevalence (%)
Overweight Obesity
16.6
1996
Year
2006 2011 2015 2019
4.4
29.1
14.0
29.4
15.1
30.0
17.7
30.4
19.7

46 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
2.5 Key Recommendations 
Key Recommendation 1 
 
Weigh and measure yourself regularly to know 
your body weight and waist circumference status.  
 
How to 
Achieve 
 
1.
 Weigh yourself in light clothing and 
without shoes using the same weighing 
scale at least once a week, preferably 
before breakfast. Determine your BMI 
based on your weight (kg) and height (m) 
and ensure your BMI is within the normal 
range (BMI 18.5 to 24.9 kg/m
2).  
 
2. Measure waist circumference using a 
measuring tape, at least once a month. The 
waist circumferences should be below the 
recommended cut-off points [male: ≤ 90 cm 
(35 inches); female: ≤ 80 cm (32 inches)]. 
 
 
Key Recommendation 2 
 
Maintain healthy body weight by balancing calorie 
intake with physical activity. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1.
Eat according to calorie and serving size 
recommended based on age, sex and 
physical activity level. 
 
2. Limit intake of ultra-processed foods in 
your daily diet. 
 
3. Drink plain water instead of sugary drinks. 
 
4. Exercise for at least 30 minutes daily and 
refer to the recommended physical activity 
pyramid (pg 65). 
 
5. Prevent weight gain overtime. 
 
 
Key Recommendation 3 
 
If overweight or obese,
 aim for a safe and steady 
weight loss. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. Set a realistic goal and monitor weight loss 
of 0.5 to 1 kg per week. 
 
 
2
. Reduce your calorie intake from 500 kcal up 
to 1000 kcal per day by reducing serving 
size. 
 
3. Use a smaller plate and eat slowly. 
 
4. Limit intake of ultra-processed foods in 
your daily diet. 
 
5. Avoid fad diets that promote fast weight 
loss in a short period of time. 
 
6. Gradually increase physical exercise to 60 
minutes per day (e.g., brisk walking, 
swimming and cycling) using the physical 
activity pyramid (pg 65) as a guide. 
 
7. Seek advice of healthcare professional if 
you have chronic diseases. 
 
 
Key Recommendation 4 
 
If underweight, aim for steady weight gain.  
 
How to 
Achieve 
 
1. Eat three main meals (breakfast,
 lunch and 
dinner) including healthy snacks in 
between main meals every day. 
 
2. Eat nutrient dense foods with high calorie 
content and limit intake of ultra-processed 
foods. 
 
3. Engage in physical exercise for 30 minutes 
per day (e.g., brisk walking, swimming and 
slow jogging) using the physical activity 
pyramid (pg 65) as a guide. Do strength 
training exercise to increase the muscle 
mass. 
 
4. Set a realistic goal and monitor weight 
increase of 0.5 to 1 kg per week. 
 
Footnote:  
Fad diets are popular diet plans that claim to reduce one’s 
weight rapidly in a short period of time, however they are 
usually deﬁcient in certain nutrients and very likely to have 
side-effects to human health in long-term practice.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
2.6 References 
 
Ackard DM (2004). Anorexia, bulimia, disordered eating and obesity. In: M. J. Legato (Ed.), Principles of Gender-Speciﬁc 
Medicine. pp. 715-728. Academic Press, New York. 
 
Amato MC, Guarnotta V & Giordano C (2013). Body composition assessment for the deﬁnition of cardiometabolic risk. 
J Endocrinol Invest 36(7):537-543. doi: 10.3275/8943. 
 
APA (American Psychiatric Association) (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. 5th ed. American 
Psychiatric Publishing, Arlington, VA. 
 
Annesi JJ, Johnson PH, Tennant GA, Porter KJ & Mcewen KL (2016). Weight loss and the prevention of weight regain: 
Evaluation of a treatment model of exercise self-regulation generalizing to controlled eating. Perm J 20(3):15-
146. doi: 10.7812/TPP/15-146. 
 
As-Sa’edi E, Sheerah S, Al-Ayoubi R, Al-Jehani A, Tajaddin W & Habeeb H (2013). Body image dissatisfaction: Prevalence 
and relation to body mass index among female medical students in Taibah University, 2011. J Taibah Univ Med 
Sci 8(2):126-133. 
 
Atallah R, Filion KB, Wakil SM, Genest J, Joseph L, Poirier P, Rinfret S, Schiffrin EL & Eisenberg MJ (2014). Long-term 
effects of 4 popular diets on weight loss and cardiovascular risk factors: a systematic review of randomized 
controlled trials. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes 7(6):815-827. doi: 10.1161/circoutcomes.113.000723. 
 
Aune D, Keum N, Giovannucci E, Fadnes LT, Boffetta P, Greenwood DC, Tonstad S, Vatten LJ, Riboli E & Norat T (2016). 
Whole grain consumption and risk of cardiovascular disease, cancer, and all cause and cause speciﬁc mortality: 
systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis of prospective studies. BMJ 14;353:i2716. 
 
Berggren T, Marchand R, Barrios A, Mitchener C, Jones A, Scherr RE & Zidenberg-Cherr S (2018). Nutrition and health 
info sheet: the paleo diet. Center for Nutrition in Schools Department of Nutrition, University of California, Davis. 
 
Bravata DM, Sanders L, Huang J, Krumholz HM, Olkin I, Gardner CD & Bravata DM (2003). Efficacy and safety of low-
carbohydrate diets: A systematic review. JAMA 289(14):1837-1850. 
 
Bray GA, Kim KK & Wilding JPH (2017). World Obesity Federation. Obesity: a chronic relapsing progressive disease 
process. A position statement of the World Obesity Federation. Obes Rev 18:715-723. 
 
Bray GA, Heisel WE, Afshin A, Jensen MD, Dietz WH, Long M, Kushner RF, Daniels SR, Wadden TA, Tsai AG, Hu FB, 
Jakicic JM, Ryan DH, Wolfe BM & Inge TH (2018). The science of obesity management: an Endocrine Society 
scientiﬁc statement. Endocr Rev 39(2):79-132. doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253. 
 
Burkhauser RV & Cawley J (2008). Beyond BMI: The value of more accurate measures of fatness and obesity in social 
science research. J Health Econ 27(2):519-529. doi: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2007.05.005. 
 
Butland B, Jebb S, Kopelman P, McPherson K, Thomas S & Mardell J (2007). Tackling Obesities: Future Choices, Foresight 
Report. Government Office for Science, London UK. 
 
Calle EE, Thun MJ, Petrelli JM, Rodriguez C & Heath CW Jr (1999). Body-mass index and mortality in a prospective 
cohort of U.S. adults. N Engl J Med 341(15):1097-1105. 
 
Carels RA, Young KM, Carissa C, Clayton AM, Spencer A & Hobbs M (2008). Can following the calorie restriction 
recommendations from the Dietary Guidelines for Americans help individuals lose weight? Eat Behav 9(3):328-
335. 
 
Cameron AJ, Magliano DJ & Soderberg S (2013). A systematic review of the impact of including both waist and hip 
circumference in risk models for cardiovascular diseases, diabetes and mortality. Obes Rev 14(1):86-94. 
 
Carraca EV, Markland D, Silva MN, Coutinho SR, Vieira PN, Minderico CS, Sardinha LB & Teixeira PJ (2011). 
Dysfunctional body investment versus body dissatisfaction: relations with well-being and controlled motivations 
for obesity treatment. Motiv Emot 35:423-434. 
 
Cash TF (2004). Body image: Past, present and future. Body Image 1:1-5.  
 
CDC (2017). Adult obesity facts. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
https://www.cdc.gov/obesity/data/adult.html  
48 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Chin YS, Appukutty M, Kagawa M, Gan WY, Wong JE, Poh BK, Mohd Shariff, Z & Mohd Taib MN (2020). Comparison of 
factors associated with disordered eating between male and female Malaysian university students. Nutrients 
12(2):318. doi:10.3390/nu12020318. 
 
Chong LS, Chin YS, Gan WY & Mohd Nasir MT (2017). Associations between socio-demographic characteristics and 
pubertal status with disordered eating among primary school children in Selangor, Malaysia. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr 
26:326-333. 
 
Deurenberg-Yap M, Chew SK, Lin VFP, van Staveren WA & Deurenberg P (2001).  Relationships between indices of 
obesity and its comorbidities in multi-ethnic in Singapore. Int J Obes 25:1554-1562. 
 
Di Angelantonio E, Bhupathiraju S, Wormser D, Gao P, Kaptoge S, Berrington de Gonzalez A, Cairns BJ, Huxley R, Jackson 
CL, Joshy G, Lewington S, Manson JE, Murphy N, Patel AV, Samet JM, Woodward M, Zheng W, Zhou M, Bansal 
N, Barricarte A, Carter B, Cerhan J, Smiyj G, Fang X, Franco O, Green J, Halsey J, Hildebrand J, Jung K, Korda R, 
McLerran D, Moore S, O’Keeffe L, Paige E, Ramond A, Reeves G, Rolland B, Sacerdote C, Sattar N, Soﬁanopoulou 
E, Stevens J, Thun M, Ueshima H, Yang L, Yun Y, Willeit P, Banks E, Beral V, Chen Z, Gapstur S, Gunter M, Hartge 
P, Jee S, Lam T-H, Peto R, Potter J, Willett W, Thompson S, Danesh J & Hu F (2016). Body-mass index and all-cause 
mortality: individual-participant-data meta-analysis of 239 prospective studies in four continents. Lancet 
388(10046):776-786. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30175-1. 
 
Dulloo AG & Montani JP (2015). Pathways from dieting to weight regain, to obesity and to the metabolic syndrome: an 
overview. Obes Rev 16(Suppl. 1):1-6. 
 
Dyson P (2015). Low carbohydrate diets and type 2 diabetes: What is the latest evidence? Diabetes Ther 6(4):411-424. 
doi: 10.1007/s13300-015-0136-9. 
 
Forrester-Knauss C & Zemp Stutz E (2012). Gender differences in disordered eating and weight dissatisfaction in Swiss 
adults: which factors matter? BMC Public Health 12(1):809. 
 
Fournier T, Tibère L, Laporte C, Mognard E, Ismail MN, Sharif SP & Poulain JP (2016). Eating patterns and prevalence 
of obesity. Lessons learned from the Malaysian Food Barometer. Appetite 107:362-371. 
 
 Genoni A, Lo J, Lyons-Wall P, Boyce M, Christophersen C, Bird A & Devine A (2019). A Palaeolithic diet lowers resistant 
starch intake but does not affect serum trimethylamine-N-oxide concentrations in healthy women. Br J Nutr 
121(3):322-329. doi: 10.1017/s000711451800329x. 
 
Ghaedi E, Mohammadi M, Mohammadi H, Ramezani-Jolfaie N, Malekzadeh J, Hosseinzadeh M & Salehi-Abargouei A 
(2019). Effects of a Palaeolithic diet on cardiovascular disease risk factors: A systematic review and meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Adv Nutr 10(4):634-646. 
 
Gomez-Arbelaez D, Crujeiras AB, Castro AI, Martinez-Olmos MA, Canton A, Ordonez-Mayan L, Sajoux I, Galban C, 
Bellido D & Casanueva FF (2018). Resting metabolic rate of obese patients under very low calorie ketogenic diet. 
Nutr Metab 15:18 doi: 10.1186/s12986-018-0249-z. 
 
Gudzune KA, Doshi RS, Mehta AK, Chaudhry ZW, Jacobs DK, Vakil RM, Lee CJ, Bleich SN & Clark JM (2015). Efficacy 
of commercial weight-loss programs. Ann Intern Med 162(7):501. doi: 10.7326/m14-2238. 
 
Headland M, Clifton P, Carter S & Keogh J (2016). Weight-loss outcomes: A systematic review and meta-analysis of 
intermittent energy restriction trials lasting a minimum of 6 months. Nutrients 8(6):354. doi: 10.3390/nu8060354. 
 
Hunschede S, Kubant R, Akilen R, Thomas S & Anderson GH (2017). Decreased appetite after high-intensity exercise 
correlates with increased plasma interleukin-6 in normal-weight and overweight/obese boys. Cur Dev Nutr 
1(3). doi: 10.3945/cdn.116.000398. 
 
IPH (2008). The Third National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS III) 2006. Institute for Public Health, Ministry of 
Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
IPH (2011). The National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS 2011). Vol. II: Non-Communicable Diseases. Institute for 
Public Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
IPH (2014). The National Health and Morbidity Survey 2014: Malaysian Adult Nutrition Survey (MANS). Institute for 
Public Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
49Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
IPH (2015). The National Health and Morbidity Survey 2015. Vol. II: Non-communicable Diseases, Risk Factors & Other 
Health Problems. Institute of Public Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
IPH (2017). National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS) 2017: Adolescent Nutrition Survey 2017. Institute of Public 
Health, National Institutes of Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
IPH (2020). National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS) 2019. Vol. 1: NCDs - Non-Communicable Diseases: Risk 
Factors and other Health Problems. Institute of Public Health, National Institutes of Health, Ministry of Health 
Malaysia, Selangor. 
 
Ismail MN (2001). Obesity in Malaysia: Increased affluence at a cost! 1
st. Asia-Oceania Conference on Obesity (AOCO 
2001), 12-13 October 2001, Maebashi, Japan.  
 
James WPT (2013). Obesity-a modern pandemic: The burden of disease. Endocrinol Nutr 260(Suppl l):3-6. 
 
Jastreboff AM, Kotz CM, Kahan S, Kelly AS & Heymsﬁeld SB (2019). Obesity as a disease: The Obesity Society 2018 
position statement Obesity 27:7-9. 
 
Jensen MD, Ryan DH, Apovian CM, Loria CM, Ard JD, Millen BE, Comuzzie AG, Nonas CA, Donato KA, Pi-Sunyer FX, 
Hu FB, Stevens J, Hubbard VS, Stevens VJ, Jakicic JM, Wadden TA, Kushner RF, Wolfe BM & Yanovski SZ (2014). 
2013 AHA/ACC/TOS Guideline for the Management of Overweight and Obesity in Adults: A Report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and The Obesity 
Society. Circulation 129(25 Suppl 2):S13-40.  
 
Johansson K, Sundström J, Marcus C, Hemmingsson E & Neovius M (2013). Risk of symptomatic gallstones and 
cholecystectomy after a very-low-calorie diet or low-calorie diet in a commercial weight loss program: 1-year 
matched cohort study. Int J Obes 38(2):279-284. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2013.83. 
 
Katzmarzyk PT, Salbaum JM & Heymsﬁeld SB (2020). Obesity, noncommunicable diseases, and COVID-19: A perfect 
storm. Am J Hum Biol 32(5):e23484. doi: 10.1002/ajhb.23484.  
 
Kamaria K, Vikram M & Ayiesah R (2016). Body image perception, body shape concern and body shape dissatisfaction 
among undergraduates students. Jurnal Teknologi (Sciences And Engineering) 78(6-8):37-42. 
 
Khawandanah J & Tewﬁ k I (2016). Fad diets: lifestyle promises and health challenges. J Food Res 5(6):80. doi: 
10.5539/jfr.v5n6p80. 
 
King NA, Horner K, Hills AP, Byrne NM, Wood RE, Bryant E, Caudwell P, Finlayson G, Gibbons C, Hopkins M, Martins 
C & Blundell JE (2012). Exercise, appetite and weight management: Understanding the compensatory responses 
in eating behaviour and how they contribute to variability in exercise-induced weight loss. Br J Sports Med 
46:315-322. 
 
Klatsky AL, Zhang J, Udaltsova N, Li Y & Tran HN (2017). Body mass index and mortality in a very large cohort: Is it really 
healthier to be overweight? Perm J 21:16-142. doi: 10.7812/TPP/16-142. 
 
Ko GTC, Chan JCN, Cockram CS & Woo JY (1999). Prediction of hypertension, diabetes, dyslipidaemia or albuminuria 
using simple anthropometric indexes in Hong Kong Chinese. Int J Obes 23:1136-1142. 
 
Konner M & Eaton SB (2010). Palaeolithic nutrition: Twenty-ﬁve years later. Nutr Clin Pract 25(6):594-602. 
 
Kruschitz R, Wallner-Liebmann SJ, Hamlin MJ, Moser M, Ludvik B, Schnedl, WJ & Tafeit E (2013). Detecting body fat-a 
weighty problem bmi versus subcutaneous fat patterns in athletes and non-athletes. PLOS One 8(8):1-9. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0072002. 
 
Kwon H, Kim D & Kim JS. (2017). Body fat distribution and the risk of incident metabolic syndrome: a longitudinal 
cohort study. Sci Rep 7(1):10955. 
 
Kyrou I, Randeva HS, Tsigos C, Kaltsas G, Weickert MO, Feingold KR, Anawalt B, Boyce A, Chrousos G, de Herder WW, 
Dungan K, Grossman A, Hershman JM, Hoﬂand HJ, Kaltsas G, Koch C, Kopp P, Korbonits M, McLachlan R, Morley 
JE, New M, Purnell J, Singer F, Stratakis CA, Trence DL & Wilson DP (2018). Clinical Problems Caused by Obesity. 
[Updated 2018 Jan 11]. In: Feingold KR, Anawalt B, Boyce A, et al. (Ed.). Endotext [Internet]. South Dartmouth 
(MA): MDText.com, Inc.; 2000-. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK278973/. 
 
50 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Lane MM, Davis JA, Beattie S, Gómez-Donoso C, Loughman A, O'Neil A, Jacka F, Berk M, Page R, Marx, M & RocksT 
(2020). Ultra-processed food and chronic noncommunicable diseases: A systematic review and meta-analysis 
of 43 observational studies. Obesity Reviews. 2020;1–19. 
 
LeBlanc ES, Patnode CD, Webber EM, Redmond N, Rushkin M & O’Connor EA (2018). Behavioral and Pharmacotherapy 
Weight Loss Interventions to Prevent Obesity-Related Morbidity and Mortality in Adults: An Updated Systematic 
Review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force [Internet]. Rockville (MD): Agency for Healthcare Research 
and Quality (US); 2018 Sep. (Evidence Synthesis, No. 168.) https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK532379/. 
 
Lichtenstein A & Van Horn L (1998). Very low fat diets. Circulation 98(9):935-939. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.98.9.935. 
 
Lim TO, Ding LM, Zaki M, Suleiman AB, Fatimah S, Siti S, Tahir A & Maimunah AH (2000). Distribution of body weight, 
height and body mass index in a national sample of Malaysian adults. Med J Malaysia 55:108-128. 
 
Lund J, Gerhart-Hines Z & Clemmensen C (2020). Role of energy excretion in human body weight regulation. Trends 
Endocrinol Metab 31(10):705-708. doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2020.06.002. 
 
Machado PP, Steele EM, Levy RB, Sui Z, Rangan A, Woods J, Gill T, Scrinis G, Monteiro CA (2019). Ultra-processed foods 
and recommended intake levels of nutrients linked to non-communicable diseases in Australia: evidence from 
a nationally representative cross-sectional study. BMJ Open 28;9(8):e029544. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2019-029544. 
 
Magkos F, Fraterrigo G, Yoshino J, Luecking C, Kirbach K, Kelly SC, de Las Fuentes L, He S, Okunade AL, Patterson BW 
& Klein S (2016). Effects of moderate and subsequent progressive weight loss on metabolic function and adipose 
tissue biology in humans with obesity. Cell Metab 23(4):591-601. 
 
Manolopoulos KN, Karpe F & Frayn KN (2010). Gluteofemoral body fat as a determinant of metabolic health. Int J Obes 
(Lond) 34(6):949-59. 
 
Manousou S, Stal M, Larsson C, Mellberg C, Lindahl B, Eggertsen R, Hulthen L, Olsson T, Ryberg M, Sandberg S & 
Nystrom HF (2017). Palaeolithic weight-loss diet puts women at risk of iodine deﬁ ciency. Eur J Clin Nutr. 
doi:10.1038/ejcn.2017.134. 
 
MASO/ AAM/ MEMS (2004). Clinical Practice Guidelines on Management of Obesity. Report of the Malaysian 
Association for the Study of Obesity, Academy of Medicine Malaysia and Malaysian Endocrine and Metabolic 
Society, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
MASO (2005). Strategy for the Prevention of Obesity. Malaysian Association for the study of Obesity (MASO), Kuala 
Lumpur. 
 
McGuinness S & Taylor JE (2016). Understanding body image dissatisfaction and disordered eating in midlife adults. 
NZ J Psychol 45(1):4-12. 
 
Miller CT, Fraser SF, Levinger I, Straznicky NE, Dixon JB, Reynolds J & Selig SE (2013). The effects of exercise training 
in addition to energy restriction on functional capacities and body composition in obese adults during weight 
loss: A systematic review. PLOS One 8(11):e81692. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081692. 
 
Muscogiuri G, Barrea L, Laudisio D, Pugliese G, Salzano C, Savastano S & Colao A (2019). The management of very low-
calorie ketogenic diet in obesity outpatient clinic: A practical guide. J Transl Med 17. 
 
Nagata J, Garber A, Tabler J, Murray S & Bibbins-Domingo K (2018). Prevalence and correlates of disordered eating 
behaviors among young adults with overweight or obesity. J Gen Intern Med 33(8):1337-1343. doi: 
10.1007/s11606-018-4465-z. 
 
Navaro D, Raz O, Gabriel S, Shriqui V, Gonen E & Boaz M (2017). Functional foods in fad diets: A review. Func Food 
Health Dis 7(9):702. doi: 10.31989/ffhd.v7i9.346. 
 
NCCFN (2010). Malaysian Dietary Guidelines. National Coordinating Committee on Food and Nutrition, Ministry of 
Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
 
NCCFN (2016). National Plan of Action for Nutrition of Malaysia (2016-2025). Nutrition Division, National Coordinating 
Committee on Food and Nutrition, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
 
NCCFN (2017). Recommended Nutrient Intakes. A report of the Technical Working Group on Nutritional Guidelines. 
National Coordinating Committee on Food and Nutrition, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
51Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Neumark-Sztainer D, Wall M, Guo J, Story M, Haines J & Eisenberg M (2006). Obesity, disordered eating, and eating 
disorders in a longitudinal study of adolescents: How do dieters fare 5 years later? J Am Diet Assoc 106(4):559-
568. 
 
NMM (2016). Eat Smart Get Fit & Feel Great: An Infographic Kit. Nutrition Month Malaysia, National Steering 
Committee, Nutrition Society of Malaysia. 
 
Noakes T & Windt J (2017). Evidence that supports the prescription of low-carbohydrate high-fat diets: A narrative 
review. Br J Sports Med 51(2):133-139. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2016-096491. 
 
Nur Nabilla AR, Chin YS & Norhasmah S (2019). Socio-demographic factors and body image perception are associated 
with BMI-for-age among children living in welfare homes in Selangor, Malaysia. Nutrients 11:142. 
 
Oh R & Uppaluri KR (2020). Low Carbohydrate Diet. [Updated 2020 Jan 3]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island 
(FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2020 Jan-. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK537084/. 
 
Omar M, Nouh F, Younis M, Younis M, Nabil N, Elamshity B, Ahmad H, Elhadad I & Elmagri A (2019). Fad diet. AFSJ 
8(2):1-11. doi: 10.9734/afsj/2019/v8i229987. 
 
Ozhan H, Alemdar R, Caglar O, Ordu S, Kaya A, Albayrak S, Turker Y & Bulur S (2012). Performance of bioelectrical 
impedance analysis in the diagnosis of metabolic syndrome. J Investig Med 60(3):587-591. doi: 
10.2310/jim.0b013e318244e2d9. 
 
Painter SL, Ahmed R., Hill JO, Kushner RF, Lindquist R, Brunning S & Margulies A (2017). What matters in weight loss? 
An in-depth analysis of self-monitoring. J Med Internet Res 19(5):e160. doi:10.2196/jmir.7457. 
 
Peckmezian T & Hay P (2017). A systematic review and narrative synthesis of interventions for uncomplicated obesity: 
Weight loss, well-being and impact on eating disorders. J Eat Disord 5:15.  
 
Pereira RF & Alvarenga M (2007). Disordered eating: Identifying, treating, preventing, and differentiating it from eating 
disorders. Diabetes Spectr 20(3):141-148. 
 
Piaggi P (2019). Metabolic determinants of weight gain in humans. Obesity (Silver Spring) 27(5):691-699. 
doi:10.1002/oby.22456. 
 
Piaggi P, Vinales KL, Basolo A, Santini F & Krakoff  J (2018). Energy expenditure in the etiology of human obesity: 
spendthrift and thrifty metabolic phenotypes and energy-sensing mechanisms. J Endocrinol Invest 41(1):83-89. 
 
Popkin BM, Du S, Green WD, Beck MA, Algaith T, Herbst CH, Alsukait RF, Alluhidan M, Alazemi N & Shekar M (2020). 
Individuals with obesity and COVID-19: A global perspective on the epidemiology and biological relationships. 
Obes Rev. 21(11):e13128. doi: 10.1111/obr.13128.  
 
Quinn DM, Puhl RM & Reinka MA (2020). Trying again (and again): Weight cycling and depressive symptoms in U.S. 
adults. PLOS One 15(9):e0239004. 
 
Rhee E (2017). Weight cycling and its cardiometabolic impact. J Obes Metab Syndr 26(4):237-242. doi: 
10.7570/jomes.2017.26.4.237. 
 
Ricardo WA, Luana de Mendonça O, Anna Cláudia CCB, Nátalli ZP & Maria NS (2020). Obesity as a risk factor for 
COVID-19: An overview, Crit Rev Fd Sci Nutr, doi: 10.1080/10408398.2020.1775546. 
 
Robinson E, Sutin AR & Daly M (2018). Self-perceived overweight, weight loss attempts, and weight gain: Evidence from 
two large, longitudinal cohorts. Health Psychol 37(10): 940-947. 
 
Rubino F, Rebecca M, Cummings DE, Eckel RH, Ryan DH, Mechanick JI, Nadglowski J, Salas XR, Schauer PR, Twenefour 
D, Apovian CM, Aronne LJ, Batterham RL, Berthoud HR, Boza C, Busetto L, Dicker D, Groot MD, Eisenberg D, Flint 
SW, Huang TT, Kaplan LM, Kirwan JP, Korner J, Kyle TK, Laferrère B, le Roux CW, McIver L, Mingrone G, Nece P, 
Reid TJ, Rogers AM, Rosenbaum M, Seeley RJ, Torres AJ & Dixon JB (2020). Joint international consensus 
statement for ending stigma of obesity. Nat Med. 26:485-497. doi: 10.1038/s41591-020-0803-x. 
 
Saltsman E, Thomason P & Roberts SB (2001). Fad diets: A review for the primary care provider. Nutr Clin Care 4(5): 235-242. 
 
Schubert MM, Sabapathy S, Leveritt M & Desbrow B (2014). Acute exercise and hormones related to appetite regulation: 
A meta-analysis. Sports Med 44:387-403.  
52 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
SIGN (1996). Obesity in Scotland: Integrating Prevention with Weight Management. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines 
Network, Edinburgh. 
 
Sonneville K, Thurston I, Milliren C, Gooding H & Richmond T (2016). Weight misperception among young adults with 
overweight/obesity associated with disordered eating behaviors. Int J Eat Disord 49(10):937-946. doi: 
10.1002/eat.22565. 
 
Steinberg DM, Tate DF, Bennett GG, Ennett S, Samuel-Hodge C & Ward DS (2013). The efficacy of a daily self-weighing 
weight loss intervention using smart scales and email. Obesity 21(9):1789-1797. 
 
Steinberg DM, Bennett GG, Askew S &Tate DF (2015). Weighing every day matters: daily weighing improves weight 
loss and adoption of weight control behaviors. J Acad Nutr Diet 115(4):511-518. doi:10.1016/j.jand.2014.12.011. 
 
Suzana S, Nik SS, Zahara AM & Hasnah H (2015). Atlas of Food Exchanges & Portion Sizes. 3
rd ed. MDC Publishers Sdn 
Bhd. 
 
Tee ES, Ismail MN, Azudin MN & Khatijah I (1997). Nutrient Composition of Malaysian Foods. Institute for Medical 
Research, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
Uzogara SG (2016). Underweight, the less discussed type of unhealthy weight and its implications: A review. American 
J Food Sci Nutr Res 3(5):126-142.  
 
Vanwormer JJ, French SA, Pereira MA & Welsh EM (2008). The impact of regular self-weighing on weight management: 
A systematic literature review. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act 5:54. 
 
Varkevisser R, van Stralen MM, Kroeze W, Ket J & Steenhuis I (2019). Determinants of weight loss maintenance: A 
systematic review. Obes Rev 20(2):171-211. doi: 10.1111/obr.12772. 
 
Villareal DT, Aguirre L, Gurney AB, Waters DL, Sinacore DR, Colombo E, Armamento-Villareal R & Qualls C (2017). 
Aerobic or resistance exercise, or both, in dieting obese older adults. N Eng J Med 376(20):1943-1955. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa1616338. 
 
Wang H, Chen YE & Eitzman DT (2014). Imaging body fat: Techniques and cardiometabolic implications. Arterioscler 
Thromb Vasc Biol 34(10):2217-2223. doi: 10.1161/atvbaha.114.303036. 
 
Wells JCK & Fewtrell MS (2006). Measuring body composition. Arch Dis Child 91(7):612-617. doi: 
10.1136/adc.2005.085522. 
 
WHO (1998). Obesity: Prevention and Managing the Global Epidemic. Report of a WHO Consultation on Obesity. World 
Health Organization, Geneva. 
 
WHO (2000). Obesity: Preventing and Managing the Global Epidemic. Report of a WHO consultation. i-xii, 1-253. 
Technical Report Series 894. World Health Organization, Geneva. 
 
WHO/ IASO/ IOTF (2000). The Asia-Paciﬁc Perspective: Redeﬁning Obesity and its Treatment. Hong Kong: World Health 
Organization, International Obesity Task Force, International Association for the Study of Obesity. 
 
WHO (2004). Appropriate body-mass index for Asian populations and its implications for policy and intervention 
strategies. Lancet 363:157-163. 
 
WHO (2018). Obesity and Overweight. World Health Organization, Geneva. 
 
WHO (2019). Sugary Drinks Tax Important First Step, But Obesity in Malaysia Demands Further Action. World Health 
Organization, Geneva. 
 
Wyka J, Malczyk E, Misiarz M, Zolotenka-Synowiec M, Calyniuk B & Baczynska S (2015). Assessment of food intakes 
for women adopting the high protein Dukan diet. Annals of the National Institute of Hygiene 66(2):137-142. 
 
Yoo S (2018). Dynamic energy balance and obesity prevention. J Obes Metab Syndr 27(4):203-212. 
 
Zhou BF (2002). Predictive values of body mass index and waist circumference for risk factors of certain related diseases 
in Chinese adults study on optimal cut-o ff points for body mass index and waist circumference in Chinese 
adults. Biom Environ Sci 15:83-95.
Appendices
53Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
54 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Moderately active-PAL = 1.75 (WHO, 1998); 
PAL - physical activity level; TDEE - total daily energy expenditure; BMR - basal metabolic rate;  
A compilation of numerous studies related to BMR, energy expenditure and PAL of Malaysians between 1994 to 2001; 
Source: Ismail (2001)
 
 
 
Table 2.4: Examples of high calorie or energy-dense foods and lower calorie choices 
Appendices 
  
Table 2.3: Basal metabolic rate (MJ/day), total daily energy expenditure (MJ/day) and Physical Activity 
Level (PAL) of Malaysian 
Subjects
Adults 30-60 5.66 9.53 1.68 4.79 8.17 1.70 
Armed Forces 20-30 5.74 12.08 2.10 NA NA NA 
Elite Athlete 20-30 6.84 14.91 2.18 5.39 10.67 1.98
Age (yr) BMR Male  
TDEE PAL BMR Female 
TDEE PAL
High calorie or 
energy-dense foods
Calorie content 
per serving 
(kcal)
Lower calorie  
choices
Calorie content 
per serving 
(kcal)
Nasi briyani (rice only) 448 White rice 207 
1 plate (245 g) 1 plate (159 g)  
 
Fried chicken 436 Fish asam pedas 122 
1 piece (154 g) 1 serving (55g)  
 
Fried kuetiau 670 Kuetiau soup 260 
1 plate (380 g) 1 bowl (360 g)  
 
Fried mee 519 Mee soup 204 
1 plate (300 g) 1 bowl (300 g)  
 
Curry mee 670 Assam laksa 470 
1 bowl (520 g) 1 bowl (680 g)  
 
Roti canai 266 Capati 192 
1 piece (84 g) 1 piece (64 g)  
 
Popia goreng 113 Popia basah 74 
1 piece (42 g) 1 piece (40 g)  
 
Currypuff 153 Red bean dumpling 139 
1 piece (48 g) 1 piece (50 g)  
 
Teh tarik 140 Teh O 60 
1 mug (250 ml) 1 mug (250 ml)  
 
Carbonated drink 137 Plain water 0 
1 can (325 ml) 1 glass (250 ml)  
Source: NMM (2016); Suzana et al. (2015); Tee et al. (1997)
55Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Table 2.5: Benefits of weight loss on health risks in obesity 
Health risk Benefits of 10 kg weight loss in a 100 kg person
Blood pressure 10 mmHg reduction in systolic blood pressure 
20 mmHg reduction diastolic blood pressure 
Weight loss also reduces the need for medication in hypertensive patients 
 
Blood Lipids 10% reduction in total cholesterol 
15% reduction in LDL cholesterol 
30% reduction in triglycerides 
8% increase in HDL cholesterol 
 
Diabetes > 50% reduction in risk of developing DM 
30-50% reduction in fasting glucose 
15% reduction in HbA1c 
 
Osteoarthritis Decrease BMI >2 kg/m
2 associated with more than 50% decreased 
risk of developing osteoarthritis 
 
Mortality 20-25% reduction in all-cause mortality 
30-40% reduction in diabetes-related death 
40-50% reduction in obesity-related cancer death 
Source: SIGN (1996); MASO/ AAM/ MEMS (2004)
56 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
57Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
KEY 
MESSAGE
3
Be physically active  
every day
3.1 Terminology 
58 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Duration  
 
Duration represents the temporal length of the 
activity, often quanti
ﬁed in minutes.  
 
 
Exercise 
 
A subcategory of physical activity that is planned,
 
structured, repetitive, and purposeful in the sense 
that the improvement or maintenance of one or 
more components of physical ﬁ tness is the 
objective. “Exercise” and “exercise training” 
frequently are used interchangeably and generally 
refer to physical activity performed during leisure 
time with the primary purpose of improving or 
maintaining physical ﬁ tness, physical 
performance, or health. 
Frequency 
  
Frequency represents the number of times a 
person engages in an activity over a pre-
determined period,
 for example weekly.  
 
Health-enhancing physical activity  
 
Health-enhancing physical activity (HEPA) refers 
to any form of physical activity that beneﬁts health 
and functional capacity without undue harm or 
risk. Physical activity does not need to be 
strenuous to be e
ffective, 30 minutes a day of 
moderate to vigorous intensity activity on ﬁve or 
more days a week, is considered suffi cient for 
health beneﬁt. 
 
 
33
KEY MESSAGE
BE PHYSICALLY  
ACTIVE EVERY DAY
Prof. Dr. Poh Bee Koon, Assoc. Prof. Dr. Hazizi Abu Saad, Dr. Denise Koh Choon Lian,  
Dr. Wee Bee Suan, Ms. Inin Roslyza and Ms. Rosne Rafidah Abd Rani.
59Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Intensity 
 
Intensity refers to the degree of overload an 
activity imposes on physiological systems 
compared to resting states. The intensity of 
physical activity can be described as light,
 
moderate or vigorous. These terms correlate to the 
absolute amount of energy expenditure or oxygen 
consumption associated with speciﬁ c types of 
activity. Oxygen consumption is expressed in 
metabolic equivalents (METs), which are multiples 
of the resting rates of oxygen consumption during 
physical activity (Ainsworth et al., 2011). One MET 
is deﬁ ned as the amount of oxygen consumed 
while sitting at rest and is equal to 3.5 ml of 
oxygen per kg/minute. In general, light 
intensity activity is physical activity carried out 
at 1.0 to less than 3.0 METs; moderate 
intensity activity is deﬁned as 3.0 to 6.0 METs; 
and more than 6.0 METs is categorized as 
vigorous intensity activity. 
 
Muscle-strengthening activity 
 
Physical activity and exercise that increase 
skeletal muscle strength,  power
, endurance, and 
mass (e.g., strength training, resistance training, or 
muscular strength and endurance exercises). 
 
Physical activity 
 
Physical activity is deﬁ ned as any bodily 
movement produced by skeletal muscles that 
result in energy expenditure. Physical activity is a 
complex behaviour that involves many aspects. It 
can be described by four parameters:
 type, 
frequency, duration and intensity. It is closely 
related to, but distinct from, exercise and physical 
ﬁtness. Exercise, on the other hand, means any 
planned, structured and repetitive bodily 
movements that are performed to improve 
physical ﬁtness. 
 
 
Physical activity has three main domains: 
 
• Occupational work: activities 
undertaken during the course of work 
 
• Household and other chores: activities 
undertaken as part of day-to-day living 
 
• Leisure-time physical activity: 
activities undertaken during discretionary 
or free time. Activity is selected on the basis 
of personal needs and interest. It includes 
exercise and sports. 
Physical activity level (PAL)  
 
Physical activity level (P AL) is a method of 
quantifying or characterising physical activity,
 
commonly according to its type, frequency, 
duration and intensity (Welk, 2002).  
 
Physical ﬁtness 
 
A set of attributes or characteristics that people 
have or achieve that relates to the ability to 
perform physical activity (Caspersen, Powell & 
Christenson,
 1985). 
 
Screen time 
 
Sedentary screen time is time spent passively 
watching screen-based entertainment, such as 
television,
 video, computer, electronic games, 
mobile devices or other visual devices. Sedentary 
screen time does not include active screen-based 
games where physical activity or movement is 
required. 
 
Sedentary behaviour 
 
Any waking behaviour characterized by an energy 
expenditure of 1.5 METS or lower while sitting,
 
reclining, or lying. Most desk-based offi ce work, 
driving a car, and watching television are 
examples of sedentary behaviours; these also 
apply to those unable to stand, such as wheelchair 
users. When operationalised, sedentary behaviour 
includes self-reported low movement sitting 
(leisure time, occupational, and total), television 
(TV viewing or screen time), and low levels of 
movement measured by devices that assess 
movement or posture. 
 
Sport 
 
Sport covers a range of activities performed within 
a set of rules and undertaken as part of leisure or 
competition. Sporting activities involve physical 
activity carried out by teams or individuals and 
may be supported by an institutional framework, 
such as a sporting agency. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
3.2 Introduction 
 
Physical activity is important for the health and well-being of people of all ages. It has long been recognised 
as an important factor in enhancing health and reducing the risk of various chronic diseases (DHHS, 2018). 
There is a dose-response relationship between physical activity and health status (Warburton & Bredin, 
2017). People who are physically active tend to be healthier than their physically inactive counterparts; they 
experience less health problems, such as obesity, cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes mellitus, 
osteoporosis and cancer particularly colon, breast and prostate cancer (Wahid et al., 2016; Lear et al., 2017). 
Regular physical activity also appears to promote a sense of well-being (Wiese, Kuykendall & Tay, 2018) better 
health-related quality of life (Marker, Steele & Noser, 2018), helps in releasing tension, and decrease the 
likelihood of anxiety (Anderson & Shivakumar, 2013; Stonerock et al., 2015), depression (Schuch et al., 2018) 
and poor cognitive development (Gao et al., 2018). Long term physical activity may also modify brain 
structure and functions, as reported in a recent study among young healthy twins in Finland (Tarkka et al., 
2019).  The new WHO Guidelines on Physical Activity and Sedentary Behaviour also reaffirmed that physical 
activities confer beneﬁts for various health outcomes, such as improved all-cause mortality, cardiovascular 
disease mortality, hypertension, site-speciﬁc cancers, type-2 diabetes, mental health (reduced symptoms of 
anxiety and depression); cognitive health, and sleep; and measures of adiposity (WHO, 2020a).  
 
Globally, physical inactivity is rising in many countries, including in Malaysia, where only a small percentage 
of the population is involved in regular and adequate exercise (Chan et al., 2017). General levels of physical 
activity have declined since the industrial revolution, where development of new technologies has enabled 
people to reduce the amount of physical labour needed to accomplish many tasks in their daily lives (Hallal 
et al., 2012). Lack of physical activity is a global health hazard and is increasing rapidly in both developed 
and developing countries where 1 in 4 adults (1.4 billion worldwide) is not active enough while more than 
80% of the world’s adolescents is insufficiently physically active (WHO, 2018). Generally, physical inactivity 
is estimated to cause 5.0 million deaths globally. People who are insufficiently active have a 20 to 30% of 
increased risk of death compared to people who are sufficiently active (WHO, 2020b). About 30% of ischemic 
heart disease, 27% of diabetes mellitus, and 21 to 25% of breast and colon cancer burden reported yearly, are 
caused by physical inactivity (WHO, 2010). More recently, sedentary behaviour, such as prolonged sitting 
time, has been associated with higher risk of mortality from all causes (Patel et al., 2018).   
 
The bottom line is that physical activity brings health beneﬁts that far outweigh the risks of adverse events 
(DHHS, 2018), hence it is vital to emphasise the importance of physical activity in order to encourage the 
nation and provide them with achievable steps of becoming more physically active. 
61Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
3.3 Scientiﬁc basis 
 
3.3.1 Physical activity and chronic disease prevention 
 
3.3.1.1 Cardiovascular disease, diabetes, cancer and all-cause mortality 
Physical activity contributes positively to human health. 
Many studies have shown signiﬁ cant and positive 
associations between physical activity with a number of 
adverse health outcomes. These include risk of type 2 
diabetes mellitus (T2DM),
 cardiovascular disease (CVD), 
and several types of cancer as well as all-cause mortality.  
 
A large prospective study of 17,265 men and 13,375 
women aged 20 to 93 years in Copenhagen found that 
people who spent three hours a week commuting to work 
by bicycle had a substantial decrease in the risk of death 
compared to those who did not commute by bicycle 
(Andersen et al., 2000). Blair (2007) concluded that there 
is sufficient evidence-base for understanding the beneﬁts 
of physical activity and chronic disease prevention. 
 
Wahid et al. (2016) in their meta-analysis of 33 studies 
concluded that those who increased their physical 
activity level from being inactive to achieving 150 
minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic activity per week 
had decreased risk of CVD incidence [RR 0.83 (0.77-0.89)] 
and CVD mortality [RR 0.77 (0.77-0.89)]. They also 
indicated a decrease in risk of T2DM incidence by 26% for 
those who increase their physical activity from being 
inactive to achieving 150 minutes of moderate-intensity 
aerobic activity per week. Another systematic review and 
dose-response meta-analysis by Kyu et al. (2016) 
concluded that the risk for ischemic heart disease among 
individuals who are low active, moderately active, and 
highly active, was reduced by 16%, 23%, and 25%, as 
compared to inactive men and women. As for ischemic 
stroke, reduction of risk was as much as 16%, 19%, and 
26% for the same categories of physical activity. 
Comparing individuals in diff erent physical activity 
categories, the reductions in risk for diabetes is 14% for 
those in low active, 25% among moderately active, and 
28% for highly active as compared to those in the inactive 
category (Kyu et al., 2016). 
There are multiple mechanisms through which physical 
exercise has the potential to reduce obesity, reduce 
inﬂammation, up-regulate mechanisms governing 
physiological antioxidant generation and drastically 
increase cellular sensitivity to endogenous, or exogenous 
insulin. Increased level of habitual physical activity in 
moderate measures has the potential to positively impact 
the health of those with T2DM, insulin resistance and pre-
diabetes (Venkatasamy et al., 2013).  
 
A meta-analysis that analysed 19 studies on colon cancer 
and 35 studies on breast cancer reported reduction in risk 
of colon cancer by 10%, 17%, and 21%, while the reduction 
in risk of breast cancer was 3%, 6%, and 14%, respectively, 
among those who are low active, moderately active, and 
highly active, as compared to inactive individuals (Kyu et 
al., 2016) while de Rezende et al. (2018) concluded that 
the association between physical activity and risk of 
breast and colon cancer were consistent. Leisure-time 
physical activity has been associated with lower risks of 
13 cancers, namely esophageal adenocarcinoma, liver, 
lung, kidney, gastric cardia, endometrial, myeloid 
leukaemia, myeloma, colon, head and neck, rectal, bladder, 
and breast (Moore et al., 2016). The World Cancer 
Research Fund and the American Institute for Cancer 
Research in their third report concluded that evidence for 
the protection of physical activity against colon cancer is 
convincing and probable against postmenopausal breast 
cancer and cancer of the endometrium. However, 
evidence suggesting that it protects against 
premenopausal breast cancer, cancers of the lung and 
pancreas is limited (WCRF/ AICR, 2018). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
62 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
3.3.1.2 Obesity and weight management 
 
Persistently higher PA level has been associated with 
decreased rate of weight gain even after controlling for 
genetic liability and childhood environment. 
There is also 
a wealth of evidence from controlled trials that exercise 
(or PA) carried out over long periods of time can generate 
energy deﬁcit and thereby induce weight loss (Wiklund, 
2016). 
 
Regular physical activity can buffer the risks associated 
with being overweight or obese, independent of its effect 
on body weight. He and Baker (2004) described a 
prospective study with a large sample size documenting 
relationship between physical activity and health 
outcomes in middle-aged adults. They found that being 
overweight or obese was associated with declines in 
physical health and development of a new physical 
difficulty (such as mobility difficulties). However, physical 
activity, as deﬁned by regular light or vigorous exercise 
or household chores, reduced the risk of declining 
physical health independently of the ability to achieve 
ideal body weight and other confounds (such as age, race, 
sex, socioeconomic status, smoking and alcohol use). 
 
A positive and signi ﬁcant dose-response association is 
evident between siting time and physical inactivity with 
body weight status. As indicated by Kong et al. (2015) low 
physical activity status [adjusted odds ratios (AORs) = 
1.03, 1.12] and long leisure sitting time and (AORs = 1.15, 
1.32) were positively associated with overweight and 
obese. 
 
Weight management interventions to reduce body weight 
are usually more effective when the strategy involves a 
combination of diet and physical activity, as compared to 
diet or physical activity alone. In their critical review of 
the literature, Chin, Kahathuduwa and Binkx (2016) 
indicated that diet plus physical activity usually result in 
8-11% weight loss after 6 months of intervention as 
compared to approximately 2-3% of weight loss after 
intervention using physical activity only strategy.  
 
 
3.3.1.3 Bone, joint and muscle health and 
performance 
 
Studies have reported positive eff ects of either a 
physically active lifestyle or exercise interventions on 
intermediate markers of bone health,  such as bone 
mineral content (BMC) and bone mineral density (BMD) 
(Howe et al.,
 2011). Four possible mechanisms that may 
explain the beneﬁ cial eff ects of physical activity in 
reducing the risk of osteoporosis are that it (1) increases 
bone mineral accrual during maturation, (2) attenuates 
the rate of bone mineral loss during aging, (3) enhances 
bone strength, and (4) reduces the risk of falls by 
improving muscle strength, ﬂexibility, coordination and 
balance. 
 
Literature has provided moderate to strong evidences on 
the importance of physical activity in optimising bone 
health during the developmental years. Even though the 
beneﬁcial effects of physical activity in the long-term is 
not well known, observational studies suggest it plays a 
strong role in preventing fractures during adulthood. 
Exercise activities during growth and human 
development period can maximise peak bone mass and 
hence delay the onset of osteoporosis (Santos, Elliott-Sale 
& Sale, 2017). Lifelong exercise is important in the 
prevention and management of osteoporosis (Beck et al., 
2017). This is possibly due to the beneﬁ ts of physical 
activity on BMD, as indicated by various randomised 
controlled trials. However, at this point in time, there is 
still a lack of information to claim a dose-response 
relationship between physical activity and bone health. 
 
There is a wealth of evidence depicting the impact of 
high-intensity resistance exercise in inducing muscle 
hypertrophy, through the enhancement of muscle mass 
and strength. However, studies have shown little or no 
anabolic effects on muscle through aerobic exercise and 
have concluded that aerobic ﬁ tness does not have an 
impact on fat-free mass (Hawkins et al., 2001). 
 
There is moderate to strong evidence that physical 
activity plays an essential role in the maintenance of bone 
health, although information is lacking to deﬁne the type 
and dose of activity required to optimise the bene ﬁts. 
Physical activity has also successfully shown bene ﬁcial 
effects on pain and disability management in people with 
knee osteoarthritis (Iwamoto et al., 2011). It is evident that 
strength training has the ability to preserve muscle mass 
with aging of an individual, whilst aerobic exercise 
exudes multiple favourable eff ects on muscle quality 
despite having little effect on the preservation of muscle 
mass. 
 
 
3.3.1.4 Mental and neurological health 
 
Multiple studies (Carek et al., 2011; Chan 
et al., 2019) 
indicate that physical activity improves mood and 
reduces symptoms of depression and anxiety, while 
aerobic-exercise intervention showed signiﬁ cant 
improvements in depression comparable to individuals 
receiving psychotropic treatment and individuals in the 
aerobic-exercise condition had signiﬁcantly lower relapse 
than those in the medication group.  
 
A systematic review by Lubans et al. (2016) highlighted 
that participation in physical activity can improve 
physical self-perceptions and enhance self-esteem in 
young people. However, more studies are needed since 
inconsistent ﬁndings had been reported on the 
relationship between physical activity, ﬁtness, cognition, 
and academic achievement (Donnelly et al., 2016). 
 
 
 
63Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
3.3.2 Physical activity and sleep recommendations for general adult population 
The W
orld Health Organization (WHO, 2010; WHO, 2018; 
WHO, 2020b) recommends adults aged 18-64 years old to 
participate in physical activities that include leisure 
physical activity, active transportation (i.e., walking, 
cycling), occupational, household chores, play games, 
sports or planned exercise, in the context of daily, family 
and community activities.  
 
The latest WHO recommendation advocates for adults to 
engage in 150 to 300 minutes of moderate-intensity 
aerobic physical activity; or do at least 75 to 150 minutes 
of vigorous-intensity aerobic physical activity, or an 
equivalent combination of moderate- and vigorous-
intensity activity, throughout the week, for substantial 
health beneﬁts (WHO, 2020b). The recommendation also 
urged adults to undertake regular physical activities of 
any MVPA bouts of any duration as all physical activity is 
beneﬁcial and every move count towards better health. 
 
For additional health beneﬁts, adults should increase their 
moderate-intensity aerobic physical activity to more than 
300 minutes per week; or engage in more than 150 
minutes equivalent combination of vigorous-intensity 
activity; or an equivalent combination throughout the 
week. Muscle strengthening activities involving major 
muscle groups at moderate or greater intensity should be 
done on at least two days a week (WHO, 2020; WHO, 2010; 
WHO, 2018).  
 
For adults who are not active, or with disease limitations, 
reducing sedentary behaviour, by moving from the 
category of “no activity” to “some levels” of activity, has 
health beneﬁts. Physical activity reduces the risk of all-
cause mortality, cardiovascular disease incidence and 
mortality, high blood pressure; and also reduces the 
incidence of type 2 diabetes and some cancers, and 
depression. Physical activity is also associated with a 
higher level of cardiorespiratory and muscular ﬁ tness 
compared, and more likely to achieve weight 
maintenance, and have a healthier body mass and 
composition (WHO, 2018). It is recommended that adults 
should limit the time spent being sedentary, and 
sedentary time should be replaced with physical activity 
of any intensity (including light intensity) (WHO 2020). 
 
Experts are in agreement that sleep is very important for 
optimal health. Sleep serves critical role in brain function, 
including neuro-behavioural, cognitive and safety-related 
performance (Maia et al., 2013), memory consolidation 
(Tononi & Cirelli, 2014), mood regulation (Minkel et al., 
2012), nociception (Roehrs et al., 2012), and clearance of 
brain metabolites (Xie et al., 2013). Sleep is also involved 
in systematic physiology, including metabolism 
(Vgontzas et al., 2014), appetite regulation (Speath, Dinges 
& Goel, 2013), immune and hormone function (Prather, 
2012), and cardiovascular systems (Petrov et al., 2014). 
Healthy sleep requires adequate duration, good quality, 
appropriate timing and regularity. The sleep environment 
contributes to a restful sleep. Sleep Council UK (2020) has 
recommended six elements that need to be considered to 
ensure quality sleep, including (i) comfortable bed, 
bedding, and pillows, (ii) suitable temperature, (iii) 
ambient lighting, (iv) sudden or continuous noise, (v) 
arousing stimuli, such as electronic devices, and (vi) 
bodily, mental, and behavioral factors. 
 
Sleep duration is one of the most frequently investigated 
sleep measure in relation to health, thus, most sleep 
recommendation focuses on this parameter. Current 
evidence supports the general recommendation for 
obtaining 7 or more hours of sleep per night on a regular 
basis to promote optimal health among adults aged 
between 18 to 60 years old (Watson et al., 2015).  In 
general, there was consensus that 6 hours of sleep or less 
was inappropriate to support optimal health in adults, 
while the appropriateness of 9 or more hours of sleep on 
optimal adult health could not be ascertained with 
certainty. However, there may be individual variability on 
optimal sleep duration due to diff erences in genetics, 
behaviour, medical and environment.  
64 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
3.3.3 Physical activity recommendations for speciﬁc groups 
 
3.3.3.1 Pregnant women 
According to the American College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists (A
COG, 2020), regular physical activity in 
all phases of life, including pregnancy, promotes health 
beneﬁts to the expectant mothers. Physical activity in 
pregnancy has minimal risks and has been shown to 
beneﬁt most women, although some modiﬁ cation to 
exercise routine may be necessary because of normal 
anatomic and physiologic changes and foetal 
requirements. Therefore, women with uncomplicated 
pregnancies should be encouraged to engage in aerobic 
and strength conditioning exercise before, during and 
after pregnancy (ACOG, 2020).  
 
The latest WHO Guidelines on Physical Activity and 
Sedentary Behaviours also stated that among pregnant 
and postpartum women, physical activity during 
pregnancy and the postpartum period confers beneﬁts on 
the following maternal and fetal health beneﬁ ts: 
decreased risk of pre-eclampsia, gestational hypertension, 
gestational diabetes, excessive gestational weight gain, 
delivery complications and postpartum depression, and 
fewer newborn complications. Participating in physical 
activity during pregnancy was also shown to have no 
adverse effects on birthweight and no increase in risk of 
stillbirth (WHO, 2020b). It is recommended that all 
pregnant and postpartum women without 
contraindication should undertake regular physical 
activity throughout pregnancy and the postpartum 
period. 
 
Pregnant women should participate in at least 150 
minutes a week of moderate intensity aerobic physical 
activity; and incorporate a variety of aerobic and muscle 
strengthening activities. Adding gentle stretching may 
also be beneﬁ cial. In addition, women who, before 
pregnancy, habitually engaged in vigorous intensity 
aerobic activity, or who were physically active, can 
continue these activities during pregnancy and the 
postpartum period (WHO, 2020b). 
 
In the Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans (DHHS, 
2018), recommendations for healthy pregnant mother, 
who are not already highly active or doing vigorous-
intensity activity, is to get at least 150 minutes of 
moderate-intensity aerobic activity a week during 
pregnancy and in the postpartum period. Preferably, this 
activity should be spread throughout the week. On the 
other hand, pregnant women who habitually engage in 
vigorous-intensity aerobic activity or who are highly 
active can continue their physical activity during 
pregnancy and in the postpartum period provided that 
they remain healthy; and discuss with their healthcare 
provider how and when physical activity should be 
adjusted over time. 
 
 
 
The New South Wales Government of Australia has 
suggested that staying active during pregnancy can help 
to maintain healthy weight (NSWA, 2016). Pregnant 
women are encouraged to aim for 30 minutes of moderate 
exercise, ideally walking or swimming, on most days of 
the week. Nevertheless, exercise that involve excessive 
stretching need to be done carefully as it could 
overstretch ligaments in the body, such as hips, knees, 
ankles or elbow joints, as ligaments tend to become looser 
during pregnancy and are therefore more prone to injury. 
High impact activity, such as jumping, or exercise which 
risks falling or injury to the abdomen, should be avoided. 
Besides, activities where oxygen supply is limited, such 
as scuba diving or mountain climbing, should also be 
avoided. 
 
The 2018 Canadian Guideline for Physical Activity 
throughout Pregnancy (Mottola et al., 2018) had 
recommended that all women without contraindications 
should remain physically active throughout pregnancy. 
According to the guidelines, pregnant women should 
accumulate at least 150 minutes of moderate intensity 
physical activity each week to achieve clinically 
meaningful health beneﬁts and reductions in pregnancy 
complications; of which a minimum of three days per 
week of physical activity should be accumulated. 
However, pregnant women are encouraged to be 
physically active every day.  
 
As for women with contraindications, safety precautions 
were suggested. Women with absolute contraindications, 
such as ruptured membrane, premature labour, 
unexplained persistent vaginal bleeding, placenta praevia 
after 28 weeks of gestation, pre-eclampsia, incompetent 
cervix, intrauterine growth restriction, high-ordered 
multiple pregnancy, uncontrolled type 1 diabetes, 
uncontrolled hypertension, uncontrolled thyroid disease, 
and other serious cardiovascular, respiratory or systemic 
disorder, may continue their usual activities of daily living 
but should not participate in more strenuous activities 
(ACOG, 2020; Mottola et al., 2018). 
 
On the other hand, women with relative 
contraindications, such as recurrent pregnancy loss, 
gestational hypertension, history of spontaneous preterm 
birth, mild or moderate cardiovascular disease or 
respiratory disease, symptomatic anaemia, malnutrition, 
eating disorder, twin pregnancy after the 28
th week, and 
other signiﬁcant medical conditions, should discuss with 
their obstetric care provider prior to participation in 
physical activity (Mottola et al., 2018). In cases where the 
pregnant woman experiences vaginal bleeding, dizziness, 
shortness of breath before exercising, chest pain, 
headache, muscle weakness, calf pain or swelling, regular 
painful contractions of the uterus, decreased foetal 
movement, and amniotic ﬂuid leakage, exercise should be 
immediately terminated (Kader & Naim-Shuchana, 2014). 
65Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
3.3.3.2 Overweight/ obese 
 
A consensus statement formed in 2002 by the 
International Association for the Study of Obesity (IASO) 
recommended approximately 45 to 60 minutes,
 or 1.7 PAL 
(Physical Activity Level) per day of moderate intensity 
activity to prevent the transition to overweight or obesity. 
National Institute of Health and Clinical Excellence 
recommended the same 45 to 60 minutes moderate 
activities each day for obesity prevention, in the absence 
of a reduction in energy intake (NICE, 2006). For 
preventing weight gain or regain in formerly obese 
individuals, 60 to 90 minutes of moderate intensity 
activity or lesser amounts of vigorous activity is required 
(Saris et al., 2003). The same amount of time and intensity 
of activity is also recommended by NICE for prevention 
of obesity (NICE, 2014). 
 
The American College of Sports Medicine Position Stand 
stated that overweight and obese individual should 
participate in at least 150 minutes of moderate intensity 
physical activity to elicit modest reduction in body weight 
(ACSM, 2009). Nevertheless, there is likely a dose e ffect 
of physical activity, with greater weight loss and enhance 
prevention of weight regained with doses of physical 
activity that approximate 250 to 300 minutes in a week 
(about 2000 kcal per week) of moderate intensity physical 
activity.  
 
The 2018 Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans 
stated that moderate-intensity aerobic physical activity 
of more than 150 minutes a week is needed to achieve 
weight stability (DHHS, 2018). Besides, muscle 
strengthening activities may help promote weight 
maintenance, although not to the same extent as aerobic 
activities. Some overweight or obese individuals may 
require the equivalent of 300 or more minutes of 
moderate-intensity physical activity a week to lose 
substantial amount of weight (more than 5% of body 
weight) and to keep a signiﬁ cant amount of weight off  
once it has been lost. Muscle strengthening activities can 
also help maintain lean body mass during weight loss.  
 
 
3.3.3.3 Exercising during airborne infectious 
pandemics
 
 
The recent COVID-19 pandemic has caused drastic 
changes to our lifestyle
. Worldwide lockdown and 
physical distancing guidelines with varying degrees of 
strictness have been implemented throughout the world, 
and have impacted the physical activity behaviour of the 
population. As physical distancing is an important 
measure to reduce the spread of airborne infections, it is 
recommended that physical activities that involve body 
contact, such as team sports, should be avoided. Other 
measures recommended to maintain physical distancing 
when exercising are to: (i) choose non-crowded locations, 
(ii) keeping a distance of at least 2 meters apart from 
others when exercising outdoors, (iii) limit time spent 
exercising in indoor shared environments such as gyms 
or ﬁtness centres, (iv) keeping a distance of 10 meters 
when exercising indoors, and (v) moderate intensity 
physical activity should be emphasised, rather than 
strenuous exercise. These measures can help to limit the 
dispersion and over-inhalation of respiratory droplets and 
thus decrease exposure to airborne viruses (Dominski & 
Brandt, 2020).  
66 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
3.4 Current status 
In Malaysia, the National Health and Morbidity Survey 
(NHMS) has been an important platform for monitoring 
the health of the population in Malaysia. The objectives of 
the NHMS are to provide community-based data on the 
pattern of common health problems, health service 
utilisation and health expenditure in the community. To 
determine the prevalence of physical activity in 
Malaysian adults, face-to-face interviews using the short 
version of International Physical Activity Questionnaire 
(IPAQ) has been impelemented in NHMS surveys since 
NHMS III in 2006 (IPH, 2008). 
 
Statistics from NHMS show that physical activity among 
adults aged 18 years and older appear to have improved 
over a decade, with the prevalence of those considered 
physically active increasing from 63.3% in 2011, to 66.5% 
in 2015, to 74.9% in 2019 (IPH, 2020). Of the physically 
active adults reported in the 2015 survey, 25.4% had 
health-enhancing physical activity while 41.1% were 
minimally active (IPH, 2015). 
 
Compared to other countries that have used the IPAQ, the 
prevalence of physically active population in Malaysia is 
slightly higher than in Taiwan (57.7%) and Japan (56.7%) 
but considerably lower than in China (93.1%) and 
Australia (82.9%) (Bauman et al., 2009). Despite increasing 
physical activity, Malaysia now ranked as Southeast 
Asia’s fattest country according to recent reports by the 
WHO, with the percentages of overweight or obese men 
and women being 43.8% and 48.6%, respectively (Chan 
et al., 2017). 
 
In Malaysia, the NHMS conducted in year 2019 reported 
that some 25.1% of adults were physically inactive (IPH, 
2020). There were signiﬁcantly more women (28.2%) than 
men (22.1%) who reported being physically inactive. 
There was also signiﬁ cantly higher prevalence of those 
who were physically inactive in the urban (26.5%) 
compared to rural (20.3%) population. The level of physical 
activity decreased among older age groups and was most 
apparent in the elderly population.  
 
Prior to that, the prevalence of physical inactivity was 
even higher; whereby the NHMS conducted in 2015 
reported 33.5% of adults were physically inactive (IPH, 
2015) and NHMS III conducted in year 2006 reported 
43.7% of adult population were inactive (IPH, 2008). 
Women were signiﬁcantly more inactive (2015 38.3% vs. 
2006 50.5%) compared to men (2015 28.9% vs. 2006 
35.3%). Signiﬁcant differences between urban and rural 
populations were also observed, whereby urban adults 
were found to be more inactive (2015 35.0% vs. 2006 
45.6%) as compared to rural adults (2015 28.7% vs. 2006 
40.1%). 
 
In view of the low levels of physical activity among 
Malaysians, it has been deemed important to include and 
highlight physical activity when revising the Malaysian 
Dietary Guidelines in 2010 as a measure to promote 
physical activity amongst our nation (NCCFN, 2010).  
 
The Physical Activity Pyramid (Figure 3.1) is a simple and 
useful guide on how to be physically active every day. 
Activities listed at the base of the pyramid are activities 
that should be incorporated in daily life and what an 
individual should do most often. Activities listed at the 
top of the pyramid are activities that are sedentary, and an 
individual should limit these activities during waking 
hours. The following recommendations for physical 
activities are based on this physical activity pyramid.  

67Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Figure 3.1. Physical Activity Pyramid 
 
LIMIT
5-7 DAYS A WEEK
EVERYDAY
Limit 
sedentary 
behaviours
Participate in muscle strengthening activities that increase 
strength and endurance of the muscles, on two or more days a 
week
Accumulate at least 30-60 minutes of moderate intensity aerobic physical activity or 15-30 
minutes of vigorous intensity aerobic physical activity, or a combination of both, on at least five 
days a week, preferably daily
 Stretching
 Partial sit up
 Push up
2-3 DAYS A WEEK
 Football
 Basketball
 Badminton
Be active every day in as many ways as you can; more is better
 Walk to the shop
 Do household chores
 Gardening
 Squats
 Yoga
 Tai chi
 Tennis
 Sepak takraw
 Table tennis
 Swimming
 Dancing
 Hiking
 Cycling
 Aerobic exercise
 Brisk walking
 Take a morning or evening walk
 Walk around the office vicinity
 Play actively with children
Note: 
• Sleep regularly for at least 7 hours every night. 
• For activities to be done on 5-7 days a week, examples are listed according to intensity from vigorous at the 
top to moderate intensity at the bottom. An activity is considered moderate intensity when an individual is able 
to talk but cannot sing comfortably while doing the activity; vigorous intensity activity, on the other hand, 
makes an individual “huff and puff”.
 Park your car a distance away and walk
 Increase walking each day
 Increase climbing up and down stairs
 Skipping rope
 Weightlifting (dumbbell)
 Sit and reach exercise
PYRAMID
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY

68 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
3.5 Key Recommendations 
Key Recommendation 1  
 
Be active every day in as many ways as you can; 
more is better.  
 
How to 
Achieve  
 
1.
Always attempt to incorporate more 
physical activities in daily life, as a form of 
exercise. Think of each movement as an 
opportunity for improving health, rather 
than as an inconvenience.  
 
2. Do these activities whenever possible so as 
to be more active: 
 
a) Choose to walk up the stairs, 
instead of taking the lift or escalator. 
 
b) Choose to walk or cycle to the shop, 
surau or other places of worship, 
instead of driving or riding a 
motorcycle. 
 
c) Do housework manually, such as 
sweeping and mopping the ﬂ oor, 
washing the car and motorcycle. 
 
d) Park car a distance away and walk 
to intended destination. 
 
e) Do gardening, such as trimming 
plants or moving pots. 
 
f) Take a walk with children or pets. 
 
3. Emerging technologies, such as activity or 
ﬁtness tracker watches or step counters, 
can be used as a tool to increase physical 
activity and reduce sedentary behavior. 
Fitness or workout phone applications can 
also be used to track physical activity and 
ﬁtness. 
 
Key Recommendation 2  
 
Accumulate at least 30-60 minutes of moderate 
intensity aerobic physical activity or 15-30 minutes 
of vigorous intensity aerobic physical activity,  on 
at least 
ﬁve days a week, preferably daily. 
Alternatively, a combination of both moderate and 
vigorous intensity aerobic physical activities can 
be done throughout the week. When ﬁ tness 
improves, the intensity level and the amount of 
time spent on physical activity can be gradually 
increased for additional health beneﬁts.  
 
How to Achieve  
 
1.
Start off  by doing moderate to vigorous 
intensity physical activities, such as 
playing badminton, brisk walking, aerobic 
exercise, cycling, swimming, hiking, jungle 
trekking, fun run or marathon. A moderate 
intensity activity is when an individual is 
able to talk but cannot sing comfortably 
while doing the activity. 
 
2. Remember, moderate intensity activities 
can be incorporated into daily life, as part 
of work, transport (walking and cycling), 
sport and leisure, as well as household 
chores. 
 
3. As ﬁtness improves, aim for more than 60 
minutes or more of moderate-intensity 
activities, or for more than 30 minutes or 
more of vigorous physical activity that 
makes you “huff  and puff ”, such as brisk 
walking (faster pace), jogging, playing 
football, netball, basketball, squash or 
tennis, every day. 
 
4. Participate in online exercise programs, 
follow along exercise videos, or workout 
using treadmill or stationary bicycle or 
other home gym equipment, when 
exercising outdoors is not possible. 
 
For a more comprehensive list of moderate and 
vigorous-intensity activities, refer to Table 3.1. 
 
Key Recommendation 3  
 
Participate in muscle-strengthening activities that 
increase strength and endurance of the muscles,  
on two or more days a week. 
 
How to 
Achieve 
 
1.
Perform exercises that improve muscle 
strength and endurance, using either 
machine, on two or more days a week, 
preferably on non-consecutive days. 
 
2. Do exercises like squats, push-ups, sit-ups 
or lunges that use own body weight for 
resistance as muscular-strengthening 
activities. 
 
3. If using machine or free weights, exercises 
to improve muscle strength should be 
performed in sets of 8 to 12 repetitions for at 
least 2 to 3 sets.  
 
Exercises to improve muscle endurance 
should be performed in sets of 15 to 25 
repetitions for at least 2 to 3 sets.   
 
Perform diff erent types of exercises that 
condition various major muscle groups. As 
muscle strength improves, the resistance 
can be increased accordingly. 
 
69Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
4. Perform other muscular-strengthening activities around the house, such as heavy gardening like digging 
or shovelling, climbing stairs, cycling, lifting or carrying heavy loads.  
 
 
For a more comprehensive list of muscle-strengthening activities, refer to Table 3.2. 
 
For examples of weekly physical activity plan that incorporate moderate and vigorous intensity physical activity 
as well as muscle-strengthening exercises, refer to Table 3.3. 
Key Recommendation 4  
 
Limit sedentary behaviours. 
 
How to Achieve  
 
1.
Limit sedentary screen time, particularly 
those for recreational purposes. For 
example, watching television, playing video 
games, or using the computer, smart phone, 
tablet or surﬁng the internet.  
 
2. Break your sedentary time often with active 
movements, while at work or while 
engaged in other sedentary activities.  
Examples of sedentary break activities are 
simple stretching or walking. 
 
Key Recommendation 5 
 
Sleep regularly for at least 7 hours every night. 
 
How to Achieve  
 
1.
Keep to a regular bedtime. Bedtime 
routines should be done in a conducive 
environment with comfortable temperature, 
suitable lighting and reduced noise. 
 
2. Avoid screen time at least 30 minutes 
before bedtime. Do not use electronic 
devices in bed. 
 
3. Avoid consumption of caff einated sugary 
foods or drinks, such as coffee, at least four 
hours before bedtime. 
Additional recommendations: Speciﬁc groups 
 
Pregnant women 
 
Pregnant women should accumulate at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity physical activity each week over 
a minimum of 5 days per week, preferably every day. 
Activities that pregnant women can perform include 
aerobic (brisk walking, swimming and other suitable aqua activities) and resistance exercises (low resistance, 
yoga) and gentle stretching. Pelvic muscle training (e.g., Kegel exercises) is recommended to be performed on 
a daily basis to strengthen muscles that support bladder, uterus and bowels.  
 
Pregnant women who are not used to exercising should begin with as little as 5 minutes a day and increase by 
5 minutes per week until 30 minutes a day is reached. For women who are already active before pregnancy, it 
is possible to continue with pre-pregnancy routine, but with approval from a health care professional. Warning 
signs to terminate exercise during pregnancy are vaginal bleeding, dizziness, shortness of breath before 
exercising, chest pain, headache, muscle weakness, calf pain or swelling, regular painful contractions of the 
uterus, decreased foetal movement, and amniotic ﬂuid leakage. 
 
Overweight/ obese 
 
For modest weight loss,
 those with previously sedentary lifestyle, a total of more than 30 minutes a day of 
moderate-intensity physical activity is suggested. For clinically signiﬁcant weight loss, at least 45 minutes of 
moderate-intensity physical activity daily is recommended. To prevent the transition to overweight or obesity, 
approximately 45 to 60 minutes per day of moderate intensity physical activity is required, especially if there is 
no reduction in energy intake. For weight control and for preventing weight gain or regain among formerly 
obese individuals, a total of 60 to 90 minutes a day of moderate intensity activity is required. Additionally, 
strength training is also recommended. 
70 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
3.6 References 
 
ACOG (American College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists) (2020). Physical activity and exercises during 
pregnancy and the postpartum period. Obstet Gynaecol 135(4):991-993. 
 
ACSM (American College of Sports Medicine) (2009). Appropriate physical activity intervention strategies for 
weight loss and prevention of weight regain for adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc 41(2):459-471. 
 
Ainsworth BE, Haskell WL, Herrmann SD, Meckes N, Bassett DR Jr, Tudor-Locke C, Greer JL, Vezina J, Whitt-
Glover MC & Leon AS (2011). 2011 Compendium of Physical Activities: A second update of codes and 
MET values. Med Sci Sports Exerc 43(8):1575-1581. 
 
Andersen LB, Schnohr P, Schroll M & Hein HO (2000). All-cause mortality associated with physical activity 
during leisure time, work, sports, and cycling to work. Arch Intern Med 160:1621-1628. 
 
Anderson E & Shivakumar G (2013). Effects of exercise and physical activity on anxiety. Front Psychiatry 4:27. 
 
Bauman A, Bull F, Chey T, Craig CL, Ainsworth BE, Sallis JF, Bowles HR, Hagstromer M, Sjostrom M & Pratt M 
(2009). The international prevalence study on physical activity: Results from 20 countries. Int J Behav Nutr 
Phys Act 6(1):21. 
 
Beck BR, Daly RM, Singh MA & Taaff e DR (2017). Exercise and Sports Science Australia (ESSA) position 
statement on exercise prescription for the prevention and management of osteoporosis. J Sci Med Sport 
20(5):438-445. 
 
Blair SN (2007). Cardiovascular disease, all-cause mortality and cancer. In: IOM (2007), Adequacy of Evidence 
for Physical Activity Guidelines Development: Workshop Summary. The National Academies Press, 
Washington DC. 
 
Carek PJ, Laibstain SE & Carek SM (2011). Exercise for the treatment of depression and anxiety. Int J Psychiatry 
Med 41(1):15-28. 
 
Caspersen CJ, Powell KE & Christenson GN (1985). Physical activity, exercise, and physical ﬁtness: Deﬁnitions 
and distinctions for health-related research. Public Health Rep 100(2):126-131. 
 
Chan JS, Liu G, Liang D, Deng K, Wu J & Yan JH (2019). Special issue–therapeutic beneﬁts of physical activity 
for mood: A systematic review on the e ffects of exercise intensity, duration, and modality. J Psychol 
153(1):102-25. 
 
Chan YY, Lim KK, Lim KH, Teh CH, Kee CC, Cheong SM, Khoo YY, Baharudin A, Lin MY, Omar MA & Ahmad NA 
(2017). Physical activity and overweight/obesity among Malaysian adults: Findings from the 2015 
National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS). BMC Public Health 17:733. 
 
Chin SH, Kahathuduwa CN & Binks M (2016). Physical activity and obesity: What we know and what we need 
to know. Obes Rev 17(12):1226-1244. 
 
de Rezende LF, de Sá TH, Markozannes G, Rey-López JP, Lee IM, Tsilidis KK, Ioannidis JP & Eluf-Neto J (2018). 
Physical activity and cancer: an umbrella review of the literature including 22 major anatomical sites 
and 770 000 cancer cases. Br J Sports Med 52(13):826-833. 
 
DHHS (US Department of Health and Human Services) (2001). The Surgeon General’s Call to Action Prevent 
and Decrease Overweight and Obesity. Department of Health and Human Services, US. 
https://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpa/pdf/calltoaction.pdf (Accessed on 7 October 2020). 
 
DHHS (US Department of Health and Human Services) (2018). Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans. 2nd 
ed. Department of Health and Human Services, US.  (Accessed on 14 May 2019). 
 
Dominski FH & Brandt R (2020). Do the bene ﬁts of exercise in indoor and outdoor environments during the 
COVID-19 pandemic outweigh the risk of infection? Sport Sci Health 17:1-6. 
 
71Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Donnelly JE, Hillman CH, Castelli D, Etnier JL, Lee S, Tomporowski P, Lambourne K & Szabo-Reed AN (2016). 
Physical activity, ﬁtness, cognitive function, and academic achievement in children: A systematic review. 
Med Sci Sports Exerc 48(6):1197-1222. 
 
Gao Z, Chen S, Sun H, Wen X & Xiangs P (2018). Physical activity in children’s health and cognition. Biomed Res 
Int 2018:8542403. doi: 10.1155/2018/8542403 
 
Hallal PC, Andersen LB, Bull F, Guthold R, Haskell W & Ekelund U (2012). Global physical activity levels: 
Surveillance progress, pitfalls and prospects. Lancet 380(9838):247-257. 
 
Hawkins SA, Marcell TJ, Victoria JS & Wiswell RA (2001). A longitudinal assessment of change in VO2max and 
maximal heart rate in master athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc 33(10):1744–1750. 
 
He X & Baker D (2004). Body mass index, physical activity, and the risk of decline in overall health and physical 
functioning in late middle age. Am J Public Health 94(9):1567-1573. 
 
Howe TE, Shea B, Dawson LJ, Downie F, Murray A, Ross C, Harbour RT, Caldwell LM & Creed G (2011). Exercise 
for preventing and treating osteoporosis in postmenopausal women. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2011(7):CD000333. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000333.pub2 
 
IPH (2008). The Third National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS III) 2006. Vol.2. Institute for Public Health, 
Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
IPH (2015). The National Health and Morbidity Survey 2015. Vol. II: Non-communicable Diseases, Risk Factors 
& Other Health Problems. Institute of Public Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
IPH (2020). National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS) 2019. Vol. 1: NCDs – Non-Communicable Diseases: 
Risk Factors and other Health Problems. Institute of Public Health, National Institutes of Health, Ministry 
of Health Malaysia, Selangor. 
 
Iwamoto J, Sato Y, Takeda T & Matsumoto H (2011). Effectiveness of exercise for osteoarthritis of the knee: A 
review of the literature. World J Orthop 2(5):37-42. 
 
Kader M & Naim-Shuchana S (2014). Physical activity and exercise during pregnancy. Eur J Physiother 16(1):2-
9. 
 
Kong IG, Lee HJ, Kim SY, Sim S & Choi HG (2015). Physical activity, study sitting time, leisure sitting time, and 
sleep time are diff erently associated with obesity in Korean adolescents: a population-based study. 
Medicine 94(44):e1965. 
 
Kyu HH, Bachman VF, Alexander LT, Mumford JE, Afshin A, Estep K, Veerman JL, Delwiche K, Iannarone ML, 
Moyer ML & Cercy K (2016). Physical activity and risk of breast cancer, colon cancer, diabetes, ischemic 
heart disease, and ischemic stroke events: Systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis for the 
Global Burden of Disease Study 2013. Br Med J 354:i3857. 
 
Lear SA, Hu W, Rangarajan S, Gasevic D, Leong D, Iqbal R, Casanova A, Swaminathan S, Anjana RM, Kumar R, 
Rosengren A, Li W, Wang Y, Wang C, Liu H, Nair S, Diaz R, Swidon H, Guta R,  Mohammadifard N, Lopez-
JaramilloP, Oguz A, Zatonska K, Seron P, Avezum A, Poirier P, Teo K & Yusuf S (2017). The effect of physical 
activity on mortality and cardiovascular disease in 130000 people from 17 high-income, middle-income, 
and low-income countries: The PURE study. Lancet 390 (10113): 2643-2654. 
 
Lubans D, Richards J, Hillman C, Faulkner G, Beauchamp M, Nilsson M, Kelly P, Smith J, Raine L & Biddle S 
(2016). Physical activity for cognitive and mental health in youth: A systematic review of mechanisms. 
Pediatrics 138(3):e20161642. 
 
Maia Q, Grandner MA, Findley J & Gurubhagavatula I (2013). Short and long sleep duration and risk of drowsy 
driving and the role of subjective sleep insufficiency. Accid Anal Prev 59:618-622. 
 
Marker AM, Steele RG & Noser AE (2018). Physical activity and health related quality of life in children and 
adolescents: A systematic review and meta-anlaysis. Health Psychol 37(10):893-903. 
 
Minkel JD, Banks S, Htaik O, Moreta MC, Jones CW, McGlinchey EL, Simpson NS & Dinges DF (2012). Sleep 
deprivation and stressors: Evidence for elevated negative affect in response to mild stressors when sleep 
deprived. Emotion 12(5):1015-1020. 
72 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Moore SC, Lee IM, Weiderpass E, Campbell PT, Sampson JN, Kitahara CM, Keadle SK, Arem H, De Gonzalez AB, 
Hartge P & Adami HO (2016). Association of leisure-time physical activity with risk of 26 types of cancer 
in 1.44 million adults. JAMA Intern Med 176(6):816-825. 
 
Mottola MF, Davenport MH, Ruchat SM, Davies GA, Poitras VJ, Gray CE, Jaramillo AG, Barrowman N, Adamo KB, 
Duggan M, Barakat R, Chilibeck P, Fleming K, Forte M, Korolnek J, Nagpal T, Slater LG, Stirling D & Zehr 
L (2018).  2019 Canadian Guideline for Physical Activity throughout Pregnancy. Br J Sports Med 
52(21):1339-1346. 
 
NCCFN (2010). Malaysian Dietary Guidelines. pp. 220. National Coordinating Committee of Food and Nutrition, 
Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
 
NICE (2014). Obesity: Identiﬁ cation, Assessment and Management. Clinical Guideline [CG189]. National 
Institute for Health and Care Excellence, London, UK. (Accessed on 10 October 2020). 
 
NSWA (2016). Physical Activity during Pregnancy. New South Wales Government of Australia, Sydney, Australia. 
http://www.gethealthynsw.com.au (Accessed on 14 May 2019). 
 
Patel AV, Maliniak ML, Rees-Punia E, Matthews CE & Gapstur SM (2018). Prolonged leisure time spent sitting 
in relation to cause-speciﬁc mortality in a large US cohort. Am J Epid 187(10):2151-2158. 
 
Petrov MER, Letter AJ, Howard VJ & Kleindorfer D (2014). Self-reported sleep duration in relation to incident 
stroke systems: nuances by body mass and race from the REGARDS study. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 
23(2):e123-e132. 
 
Prather AA, Hall M, Fury JM, Ross DC, Muldoon MF, Cohen S & Marsland AL (2012). Sleep and antibody response 
to hepatitis B vaccination. Sleep 35(8):1063-1069. 
 
Roehrs TA, Harris E, Randall S & Roth T (2012). Pain sensitivity and recovery from mild chronic sleep loss. Sleep 
35(12):1667-1672. 
 
Santos L, Elliott-Sale KJ & Sale C (2017). Exercise and bone health across the lifespan. Biogerontology 18(6):931-
946. 
 
Saris WH, Blair SN, van Baak MA, Eaton SB, Davies PS, Di Pietro L, Fogelholm M, Rissanen A, Schoeller D, 
Swinburn B, Tremblay A, Westerterp KR & Wyatt H (2003). How much physical activity is enough to 
prevent unhealthy weight gain? Outcome of the IASO 1
st Stock Conference and consensus statement. 
Obes Rev 4:101-114. 
 
Schmidt WD, Biwer CJ & Kalscheuer LK (2001). Effects of long versus short bout exercise on ﬁtness and weight 
loss in overweight females. J Am Coll Nutr 20(5):494-501. 
 
Schuch FB., Vancampfort D, Firth J, Rosenbaum S, Ward PB, Silva ES, Hallgren M, Ponce De Leon A, Dunn AL, 
Deslandes AC & Fleck MP (2018). Physical activity and incident depression: a meta-analysis of 
prospective cohort studies. Am J Psychiatry 175(7):631-648. 
 
Sleep Council UK (2020). Perfect Sleep Environment. Sleep Council, London, UK. 
https://sleepcouncil.org.uk/advice-support/sleep-advice/perfect-sleep-environment (Accessed 20 
September 2020). 
 
Speath AM, Dinges DF & Goel N (2013). Effects of experimental sleep restriction on weight gain, caloric intake, 
and meal timing in healthy adults. Sleep 36(7):981-990. 
 
Stonerock GL, Hoffman BM, Smith PJ & Blumenthal JA (2015). Exercise as treatment for anxiety: systematic 
review and analysis. Ann Behav Med 49(4): 542-556. 
 
Tarkka IM, Hautasaari P, Pesonen H, Niskanen E, Rottensteiner M, Kaprio J, Savic AM & Kujala UM (2019). Long 
term physical activity may modify brain structure and function: Studies in young healthy twins. J Phys 
Act Health 16(8):637-643. 
 
Tononi G & Cirelli C (2014). Sleep and the price of plasticity: from synaptic and cellular homeostasis to memory 
consolidation and integration. Neuron 81(1):12-24. 
 
73Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Venkatasamy VV, Pericherla S, Manthuruthil S, Mishra S & Hanno R (2013). Effect of physical activity on insulin 
resistance, inﬂammation and oxidative stress in diabetes mellitus. J Clin Diagn Res 7(8):1764-1766. 
 
Vgontzas AN, Fernandez-Mendoza J, Miksiewicz T, Kritikou I, Shaffer ML, Liao D, Basta M & Bixler EO (2014). 
Unveiling the longitudinal association between short sleep duration and the incidence of obesity: The 
Penn State Cohort. Int J Obes 38(6):825-832. 
 
Wahid A, Manek N, Nichols M, Kelly P, Foster C, Wester P, Kaur A, Smith CF, Wilkins E, Rayner M, Roberts N & 
Scarborough P (2016). Quantifying the association between physical activity and cardiovascular disease 
and diabetes: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Heart Assoc 5:e002495. 
 
Warburton D & Bredin SSD (2017). Health beneﬁts of physical activity: A systematic review of current systematic 
reviews. Curr Opin Cardiol 32(5):541-556.  
 
Watson NF, Badr MS, Belenky G, Bliwise DL, Buxton OM, Buysse D, Dinges DF, Gangwisch J, Grandner MA, 
Kushida C, Malhotra RK, Martin JL, Patel SR, Quan SF & Tasali E (2015). Joint consensus statement of the 
American Academy of Sleep Medicine and Sleep Research Society on the recommendation amount of 
sleep for a healthy adult: Methodology and discussion. Sleep 38(8):1161-1183. 
 
WCRF/ AICR (2018). Diet, Nutrition, Physical Activity and Cancer: A Global Perspective. Continuous Update 
Project Expert Report 2018. World Cancer Research Fund, London, UK. 
http://www.dietandcancerreport.org (Accessed on 10 October 2020). 
 
Welk GJ (2002). Introduction to physical activity research. In: Physical Activity Assessment in Health-Related 
Research. Human Kinetics, Champaign, Illinois, USA.  
 
Wiese CW, Kuykendall L & Tay L (2018). Get active? A meta-analysis of leisure-time physical activity and 
subjective well-being. J Posit Psychol 13(1):57-66. 
 
Wiklund P (2016). The role of physical activity and exercise in obesity and weight management: Time for critical 
appraisal. J Sport Health Sci 5(2):151-154. 
 
WHO (2010). Global Recommendations on Physical Activity for Health. World Health Organisation. Geneva, 
Switzerland. 
 
WHO (2011). Global Recommendations on Physical Activity for Health, 18-64 years old. World Health 
Organisation, Geneva, Switzerland.  https://www.who.int/dietphysical-activity-recommendations-18-
64years.pdf (Accessed 7 May 2019). 
  
WHO (2018). Physical Activity. World Health Organisation, Geneva, Switzerland. https://www.who.int/news-
room/fact-sheets/detail/physical-activity (Accessed on 21 August 2019). 
 
WHO (2020a). Physical Activity. World Health Organisation, Geneva, Switzerland.  (Accessed on 30 December 
2020). 
 
WHO (2020b). WHO Guidelines on Physical Activities and Sedentary Behaviour. World Health Organisation, 
Geneva, Switzerland. 
 
Xie L, Kang H, Xu Q, Chen MJ, Liao Y, Thiyagarajan M, O’Donnell J, Christensen DJ, Nicholson C, Iliff JJ & Takano 
T (2013). Sleep drives metabolites clearance from the adult brain. Science 342(6156):373-377. 
 
74 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Appendices
75Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
76 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Moderate activity 
3.0 to 6.0 METs 
(3.5 to 7 kcal/min)
Vigorous activity 
Greater than 6.0 METs 
(more than 7 kcal/min)
Aerobic activities: 
 
• Walking at a moderate or brisk pace of 80 to 100 
m/min on firm and level surface indoor or 
outdoor  
• Walking while carrying an object or a child 
weighing around 7 kg on firm and level ground. 
• Walking while pushing a stroller with child or an 
adult in a wheelchair at 55-80 m/min 
• Running at a speed less than 100 m/min 
• Actively playing with children – walking, running, 
or climbing, playing active children games 
(hopscotch, dodgeball, t-ball)  
• Carrying an object or child weighing from 0.5-12 
kg up a flight of stairs 
• Carrying an object or child weighing from 11-33 
kg down a flight of stairs  
• Child care: Bathing, grooming, feeding, 
occasional lifting of child while standing, 
moderate effort 
• Elder care: Bathing, dressing, moving into and 
out of bed, a disabled adult 
• Pet care: Bathing, grooming a dog 
• House cleaning: Moderate to vigorous effort in 
household task (i.e., cleaning, sweeping, 
washing the car, washing the windows, washing 
dishes) 
• Playing Frisbee recreationally 
• Skateboarding moderate to vigorous effort 
• Ice skating less than 14 km/h 
• Bicycling 9 to 16 km/h, level terrain, or with few 
hills  
• Stationary bicycling – light to moderate effort 
between 30 to 89 watts 
• Step aerobics with less than 4-inch step 
• Ballroom dancing such as waltz, foxtrot, samba, 
tango, mamba, cha cha, slow dancing 
• Traditional dancing such as joget, mak yong 
• Ballet, modern dance and jazz rehearsal or class 
• Horseback riding – trotting, walking 
• Saddling or grooming a horse 
• Trampolining – recreational and competitive 
Aerobic activities: 
 
• Race-walking and aerobic walking at 130 m/min 
or faster on a firm and level surface indoor or 
outdoor 
• Jogging while pushing a stroller designed for 
sport use  
• Jogging or running  
• Vigorously playing with children – running longer 
distances or playing strenuous games with 
children  
• Carrying an adult or a child up a flight of stairs  
• Standing or walking while carrying an adult or a 
child 
• Wheeling your wheelchair  
• Walking and climbing briskly up a hill  
• Roller skating or in-line skating at a brisk pace  
• Bicycling more than 16 km/h or bicycling on 
steep uphill terrain  
• Stationary bicycling – using vigorous effort  
• Stationary bicycling – moderate to vigorous 
effort between 90 to 270 watts  
• Aerobic exercise – high impact  
• Step aerobics with 6 to 12-inch step 
• Teaching an aerobic dance class 
• Professional ballroom dancing – energetically  
• Traditional dancing – such as zapin, joget 
lambak, kuda kepang 
• Modern dancing, disco – energetically  
• Ballroom dancing (i.e. line dancing, polka, folk, 
irish step dancing) 
• Ballet, modern dance and jazz performance, 
vigorous effort  
• Horseback riding – galloping or jumping  
• Polo, on horseback 
• Ice skating at a speed more than 14 km/h 
• In-line skating (rollerblading) at a speed 14 to 24 
km/h  
 
 
 
 
Appendices 
 
For second level of physical activity pyramid, examples of moderate and vigorous activities defined by 
level of intensity are as follows: 
 
Table 3.1: Examples of moderate and vigorous activities defined by level of intensity 
77Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Moderate activity 
3.0 to 6.0 METs 
(3.5 to 7 kcal/min)
Vigorous activity 
Greater than 6.0 METs 
(more than 7 kcal/min)
Aerobic activities (games): 
 
• Table tennis  
• Tennis – doubles or hitting balls, non-game play, 
moderate effort 
• Golf, wheeling or carrying clubs 
• Softball – fast pitch or slow pitch  
• Basketball – shooting baskets  
• Volleyball – played on a hard court surface with 
6 to 9 players  
• Netball – played on a hard court surface with 6 
to 9 players  
• Cricket – batting, bowling, and fielding  
• Badminton singles or doubles played socially 
• Archery (non-hunting)  
• Fencing 
• Bowling 
• Gymnastics – general moves 
 
Aerobic exercise (water activities): 
 
• Water aerobics and water calisthenics 
• Swimming – recreational or in slow or moderate 
effort 
• Treading water – slowly, moderate effort  
• Diving – springboard or platform  
• Snorkelling  
• Canoeing or rowing a boat at a speed between 6 
to 9 km/h, moderate effort  
• Whitewater rafting, kayaking, canoeing  
• Sailing – recreational or competition  
• Paddle boating  
• Kayaking – on a lake, calm water 
• Water walking – moderate effort, moderate pace 
 
Aerobic activities (games): 
 
• Most competitive sports 
• Tennis – singles  
• Football and futsal – competitive  
• Basketball – drills, practice, officiating 
• Wheelchair basketball  
• Hockey – ice and field 
• Beach volleyball – on sand court 
• Handball – general or team  
• Squash 
• Sepak takraw – competitive  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aerobic exercise (water activities): 
 
• Water jogging  
• Swimming – steady paced laps  
• Synchronised swimming  
• Treading water – fast, vigorous effort  
• Free diving 
• Scuba diving 
• Water polo  
• Canoeing, rowing or kayaking at a speed more 
than 9 km/h, vigorous effort  
• Water walking – vigorous effort, vigorous pace 
 
 
 
 
Table 3.1: Examples of moderate and vigorous activities defined by level of intensity (cont...) 
78 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Moderate activity 
3.0 to 6.0 METs 
(3.5 to 7 kcal/min)
Vigorous activity 
Greater than 6.0 METs 
(more than 7 kcal/min)
House Chores: 
 
• General household tasks requiring considerable 
effort 
• Scrubbing the floor or bathtub while on hands 
and knees, hanging laundry on a clothesline, 
sweeping an outdoor area, cleaning out the 
storeroom, washing windows, moving light 
furniture, packing or unpacking boxes, walking 
and putting household items away, carrying out 
heavy bags of trash or recyclables (such as 
glass, newspapers, and plastics), or carrying 
water  
• Gardening and yard work: Raking the lawn, 
bagging grass or leaves, digging, hoeing, 
shovelling or weeding while standing or bending  
• Planting trees, trimming shrubs and trees, 
hauling branches, stacking wood  
• Home repair: Cleaning gutters, refinishing 
furniture, sanding floors with a power sander, or 
laying or removing carpet or tiles  
• General home construction work: Roofing, 
painting inside or outside of the house, wall 
papering, scraping, plastering, or remodelling 
• Automobile bodywork  
• Hand washing and waxing a car 
House Chores: 
 
• Heavy housework: Moving or pushing heavy 
furniture, carrying household items up a flight of 
stairs 
• Felling a large tree 
 
Modified from: Ainsworth et al. (2011).
Table 3.1 Examples of moderate and vigorous activities defined by level of intensity (cont...) 
79Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
For the third level of physical activity pyramid, examples of flexibility and strength training activities 
defined by level of intensity are as follows: 
 
Table 3.2: Examples of flexibility and strength training activities defined by level of intensity 
Moderate activity 
3.0 to 6.0 METs 
(3.5 to 7 kcal/min)
Vigorous activity 
Greater than 6.0 METs 
(more than 7 kcal/min)
Strength training: 
 
• Putting groceries away – walking and carrying 
especially large or heavy items. 
• Resistance (weight) training such as squats, 
slow or explosive effort 
• Resistance (weight training) with 8-15 repetition 
at varied resistance 
 
Strength training (exercise & sports): 
 
• Weight training and bodybuilding using free 
weights or Universal-type weights  
• Boxing – punching bag 
 
Endurance training: 
 
• Resistance (weight training) with 15-25 repetition 
at low resistance (10-30% of maximum weight) 
• Using a stair climber machine at a light-to-
moderate pace 
• Using a rowing machine – with moderate effort 
 
Flexibility exercises: 
 
• Stretching – lower hold duration (10-15 s)  
• Yoga – beginner poses and shorter holding 
duration 
• Tai chi, qi gong – moderate to vigorous effort 
• Gymnastics 
Strength training: 
 
• Carrying several heavy bags of groceries at one 
time up a flight of stairs.  
• Grocery shopping while carrying young children 
and pushing a full grocery cart, or pushing two 
full grocery carts at once 
 
 
Strength training (exercise & sports): 
 
• Circuit weight training  
• Boxing – in the ring, sparring 
 
 
Endurance training: 
 
• Resistance (weight training) with 15-25 repetition 
at high resistance (40-60% of maximum weight 
• Using a rowing machine – with vigorous effort  
• Using an arm cycling machine – with vigorous  
• Jump rope  
 
Flexibility exercises: 
 
• Stretching – higher hold duration (15-30 s) 
• Yoga – more difficult pose and longer holding 
duration 
• Tai chi, qi gong – vigorous effort 
Modified from: Ainsworth et al. (2011).
80 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Table 3.3   : Examples of weekly physical activity plans for various population groups 
 
Sample of weekly physical activity plan for Malaysians - Always warm-up sufficiently before exercise 
and cool-down with light stretches after each exercise session 
Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat Sun
Total  
amount  
of MVPA 
(minute)
Working Adults  
(150 minutes 30 min 30 min 30 min 30 min 30 min 150 min 
MPA/week)  
 
Working Adults  
(80 minutes 20 min 20 min 20 min 20 min 80 min 
VPA/week) 
 
Working Adults  
(240 minutes 30 min 60 min 60 min 30 min 60 min 240 min 
MVPA/week)  
 
Housewife   
(150 minutes 30 min 30 min 30 min 30 min 30 min 150 min 
MVPA/week)  
 
Pregnant Women    
(150 minutes 30 min 30 min 30 min 30 min 30 min 150 min 
MVPA/week)  
 
Overweight/ Obese  
Adults (225 45 min 45 min 45 min 45 min 45 min 225 min 
minutes MVPA)  
Days
TYPE OF ACTIVITIES 
Moderate Aerobic Physical Activity  
Vigorous Aerobic Physical Activity 
Muscle-strengthening Activity 
Kegel Exercises
1 
Pregnancy safe Flexibility2 
Pregnancy safe Muscle Strength and 
Endurance Activity
3 
 
Note: 
1. Kegel Exercises - Kegel exercises helps strengthen the pelvic floor muscle, which stretch during pregnancy and childbirth. Start 
with a hold of 3 to 5 seconds and relax 3 to 5 seconds, and complete 20 repetitions. Work towards holding for 5 to 10 seconds and 
relax for 5 to 10 seconds, completing 2-3 sets of 20 repetitions. For mid to late pregnancy
, it is recommended to do Kegel exercise 
while on all fours or lying side-ways with a pillow underneath for support.  
 
2. Pregnancy Safe Flexibility - Flexibility exercises can be done every day. Avoid deep back bend or other contortions like yoga and 
avoid lying on the back for extended periods.  
 
3. Pregnancy Safe Muscle Strength and Endurance Activity -  Muscle strengthening and endurance exercises can be done during 
pregnancy, but do not over-exert. 
Avoid weighted sit-up exercises, exercises that use heavy barbells behind the neck, abdominal 
rotation machines, circuit classes, and movements that may touch the baby bump. Not recommended to perform exercises with 
weights in late pregnancy, i.e. third trimester. 
Population
KEY 
MESSAGE
4
healthy food
Cook nutritious foods at home 
more often and choose  
healthier options when  
eating out 
82 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
4.1 Terminology  
Home cooked foods 
 
Home cooked foods are deﬁned as foods prepared 
at home using fresh and nutritious ingredients and 
healthy cooking methods. 
 
Eating out 
 
Eating out is deﬁ ned as eating foods prepared 
outside from home by food vendors such as in food 
courts, warung
, mamak, restaurants, western fast 
foods, food trucks, hawker stalls and other form of 
eateries. This includes ordering these foods for 
indoor, office or home consumption through take-
away or delivery services. 
Healthier options 
 
Healthier options are deﬁ ned as foods and 
beverages which contain less fat, sugars,
 sodium, 
saturated fat, free of trans fat, and/or higher in 
dietary ﬁbre, wholegrains and rich in nutrients 
Healthier options include food choices which are 
prepared with low fat cooking methods such as 
steaming, roasting, baking, clear soups and stir-
frying.  
 
 
 
 
 
44
KEY MESSAGE
COOK NUTRITIOUS FOODS AT 
HOME MORE OFTEN AND 
CHOOSE HEALTHIER OPTIONS 
WHEN EATING OUT
Ms. Siti Shuhailah Shaikh Abd Rahim, Ms. Ruhaya Salleh, Dr. Yang Wai Yew and  
Prof. Dr. Winnie Chee Siew Swee.
4.2 Introduction 
 
Cooking more frequently may shift diets away from eating 
outside the home and depending on the cooking method 
and ingredients, cooking at home results in lower 
consumption of unhealthy foods that are strongly 
associated with poor diet and diet-related health 
outcomes (Wolfson, Leung & Richardson, 2020). Cooking 
at home can also provide more control over the precise 
ingredients used, which, depending on what and how a 
person cooks, could have a positive inﬂuence on dietary 
intake, diet quality scores and diet-related diseases such 
as obesity, diabetes and hypertension. 
 
There is an increasing prevalent of eating out in Malaysia 
as indicated with the rise in food away from home 
expenditure to 11.2% in 2019 across all household income 
classes (Department of Statistics, Malaysia, 2019). Eating 
out has become more affordable and available (including 
24 hours’ restaurants) especially in urban settings. The 
rising demand for food away from home has stimulated 
the development of food catering and other industries and 
inﬂuenced the orientation of food producers, processors, 
and retailers towards food service industry and 
manufacturing (Tan 2010; Noraziah & Mohd Azlan, 2017). 
Online food ordering is the new eating out and according 
to Euromonitor (2015), the 100% home delivery market in 
Malaysia has a value of RM 253 million in 2014 and is 
expected to continue to grow at 11% per annum. It has 
been shown that online food consumption is driven by 
both convenience and hedonic motivations (Nejati & 
Moghaddam, 2013). 
 
The practice of eating out in Malaysia are largely 
inﬂuenced by factors such as working away from home, 
working mothers, and food varieties (both local and 
international) served at many premises (Noraziah & Mohd 
Azlan, 2017). From a nutrition and health standpoint, the 
exposure to obesogenic environment within the nutrition 
transition in developing countries such as Malaysia 
include the increased access to unhealthy foods away 
from home (Popkin, Adair & Ng, 2012). The nature of the 
current Malaysian foods served at food premises – sweet, 
oily, fatty – are of good taste but can promote overeating, 
imbalanced diet and food safety issues.  
 
Therefore, it is imperative that Malaysians are provided 
with guidelines on how to prepare home cooked meals 
more often and to choose healthier foods when eating 
out. 
 
 
4.3 Scientiﬁc basis  
 
An individual’s nutrient intakes and overall health can be 
affected by what he or she eats at home. While research 
across all age-groups from children, adolescents to adults 
reported eat out has been linked to adverse health 
outcomes, eating foods cooked at home from basic 
ingredients has been linked to increased intake of fruits, 
vegetables, and whole grains, reduced BMI, and improved 
general health (McLaughlin, Tarasuk & Kreiger, 2003; 
Larson et al., 2006 Laska et al., 2012). A study of young 
adults found those that cooked more frequently were 
more likely to achieve nutrition guideline goals for fat, 
calcium, whole grain, fruit and vegetable intake (Larson et 
al., 2006). Another study found cooking classes increased 
intake of fruit and vegetables and improved food safety 
behaviours (Brown & Hermann, 2005). A national survey 
in the United States have also shown that more frequent 
cooking at home is associated with better diet quality 
overall and among lower- and higher-income adults 
(Wolfson, Leung & Richardson, 2020). 
 
A systematic review was conducted in 2011 to 2016 of 34 
studies (mostly from Western countries, Indonesia, Japan 
and Hong Kong) on the impact of interventions for adults 
that included a cooking component on diet, health, and 
psychosocial outcomes (Reicks, Kocher & Reeder, 2018) 
showed improvements in fruit and/ or vegetable intake 
and weight. Most studies also showed positive dietary 
behaviour changes and improvements in cooking 
conﬁdence and knowledge.  
 
Several reviews on cooking intervention and outcomes 
have shown that common food skills needed include 
planning food shopping, as well as purchasing and 
shopping behaviours (Raber et al., 2016; McGowan et al., 
2017).  Raber et al. (2016) summarized the outcomes of 59 
cooking interventions to prevent chronic disease within a 
conceptual framework involving 5 major constructs and a 
series of individual behaviours. The 5 major constructs 
included cooking frequency, skills and methods, minimal 
use of ingredients that guidelines suggested should be 
limited, ingredient additions and replacements, and 
ﬂavoring. This is shown in Figure 4.1.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
83Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
84 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Healthy Cooking for Chronic Disease Prevention
Skills/ Methods: 
• Avoiding cooking red meat with high temperature methods 
• A
voiding deep frying foods 
• Using low fat methodology 
• Accurately measure ingredients 
• Avoiding cooking meats or fish to “well done”/ heavy brown
Minimal Usage: 
• Added sugar/ sweeteners 
• Animal fats 
•
Processed foods 
• Red meat 
Flavouring: 
• Using herbs/ 
spices/ citrus 
• Reducing salt 
•
Avoiding 
processed meats 
for flavouring 
• Avoiding 
margarine/ 
cream-based 
sauces/ coconut-
based sauces 
Additions/ Replacements: 
• Adding unprocessed fruit/ vegetables 
• Use healthy oil in cooking 
•
Replace refined grains with whole grains 
Biological processes 
during cooking 
(Heterocyclic aromatic 
amines formation)Nutrient intake (fat, 
saturated fat, 
micronutrients, 
sodium, fiber, calories)
Chronic Disease 
Health Outcomes: 
(obesity, 
cardiovascular 
disease, diabetes, 
cancer)
Cooking Frequency: 
• Cooking at home 
• Cooking from basic 
ingredients
Figure 4.1. Conceptual model of healthy cooking: Scheme depicting the conceptual framework and the constructs that define healthy cooking i
n relation to chronic disease. 
This figure outlines the directionality of these constructs and how they inter-relate to influence dietary behaviours and health 
Source:  Adapted from Raber et al. (2016). 
85Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Among adolescents, the family meal is positively 
associated with intake of fruits, vegetables, dietary ﬁbre 
and micronutrients while negatively associated with 
intake of soft drink, fried food, saturated and trans fat 
(Larson et al., 2007). Home and family environments are 
essential in the development of children’s and 
adolescents’ food preferences and consumptions habits, 
and thus prevention of childhood obesity (Birch & 
Davison, 2001).  
 
On the contrary, the exposure to obesogenic environment 
within the nutrition transition including increased access 
to unhealthy food away from home such as Western-style 
food, fast food and energy-dense foods would predispose 
a major risk of becoming overweight and obese (Wang & 
Lobstein, 2006; Swinburn et al., 2011). There has been 
some concern in the scientiﬁ c literature on eating out 
associated with larger portion sizes (Ledikwe, Ello-Martin 
& Rolls, 2005), higher energy densities (Prentice and Jebb, 
2003) and lack of consumer information (Blumenthal & 
Volpp, 2010). A recent study investigating the relationship 
between the frequency of eating out and obesity among 
adults from the sixth Korean National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey (KNHANES VI) from 2013 
to 2015 reported that the risk of obesity and unbalanced 
diets increased with the frequency of eating out (Dahye 
Kim & Byeong-il Ahn, 2020). 
 
Two systematic reviews reported that eating out was 
identiﬁed as a risk factor for higher energy and fat intake 
and lower micronutrient intake with an increased risk of 
weight gain and obesity over time (Lachat et al., 2012; 
Yang et al., 2012). Lachat and colleagues found a 
substantial increase in the energy contribution from food 
away from home during the last decades (Lachat et al., 
2012), while within the Asian developing countries, three 
studies reported positive associations between eating out 
and increased risk of childhood overweight and obesity 
in India (Jeemon et al., 2009) and China (Li et al., 2010; 
Shan et al., 2010). A nationwide survey in Brazil found that 
eating out was associated with overweight and obesity 
only among men, with the highest frequencies of 
consumption soft drinks and sit-down meals being 
reported (Bezerra & Sichieri, 2009). In Malaysia, a study 
from Kelantan amongst the adolescence revealed that 
eating out from home and fast food consumption were 
negatively associated with healthy-based food pattern, 
yet positively associated with Western-based food pattern 
(Nurul-Fadhilah, Teo & Foo, 2016). 
 
 
 
Both socio-economic and demographic variables have 
differential impacts on the expenditure on food away from 
home. Yet, the demographic shifts have resulted in less 
time available for food preparation, with signiﬁcant effects 
on the home food environment (Bowers, 2000). It has been 
established that households with higher disposable 
incomes are known to spend more on food outside 
(Kinsey, 1994). There are consistent positive associations 
between socioeconomic status and greater energy 
contribution from food away from home. Adults or 
children from higher socioeconomic strata, as measured 
by higher household income (van’t Riet, den Hartog & van 
Staverev, 2002; Lachat et al., 2009), or availability of pocket 
money (Lachat et al., 2009), had a higher energy 
contribution from eating outside food. As for Malaysia, 
besides increased opportunities to eat out, the prices are 
sometimes lower than the cost of a homemade meal 
(Noraziah & Mohd Azlan, 2017), hence promoted the 
likelihood of eating out. 
 
Patterns of eating in Malaysia have changed with social 
transformation vis-a vis urbanization and eating-out is a 
manifestation of the changes including both external 
forces in the urban environment and internal drive at 
homes (Noraziah & Mohd Azlan, 2017). Eating out at the 
individual level occurs during working days and at the 
family level occurs during weekends, as observed at food 
premises and feast held either at houses or offi ces 
(Noraziah & Mohd Azlan, 2017). Research has shown that 
amount of time spent on food preparation and cooking 
affected the diet quality. Those spending less than one 
hour per day on food preparation was associated with 
signiﬁcantly more money spent on food away from home 
and higher fast food consumption (Monsivais, Aggarwal & 
Drewnoski, 2014). 
 
Other potential threats implicated with eating out include 
issues of food quality which may predispose the 
population to food safety risk. In Malaysia, the hot and 
humid weather alongside the environmental pollutants 
when eating out in open spaces such as street foods 
provide a suitable ground for most bacterial growth 
(Abdul-Mutalib et al., 2015).  Food eateries with poor 
hygiene conditions are linked to contaminated and unsafe 
foods, hence causing food poisoning outbreaks. While 
diarrhoea is the most common symptom of foodborne 
illnesses, other serious consequences include kidney and 
liver failure, brain and neural disorders, and death. Hence, 
continuous exposure towards poor sanitary conditions 
will lead to serious health hazard (WHO, 2002). 
 
 
86 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
4.4 Current status 
Data on cooking at home and cooking skills among 
Malaysians is scarce compared to studies on food 
consumption away from home. Previous literature 
examining food consumption in Malaysia focuses 
primarily on Malaysia’s household food demand. 
Generally, the trend of eating out in Malaysia is evident 
based on the monthly household expenditure pattern 
from 1993 to 2019 (Department of Statistics Malaysia, 
2019). The expenditure for food and non-alcoholic 
beverages (indicator of food at home) had declined from 
23.8% in 1993 to 18.0% in 2016. However, the expenditure 
for food away from home increased to 10.7%. On actual 
quantity, the food consumed at home had been 
substituted for food away from home, which was reﬂected 
in the reduced percentages of expenditure on food at 
home across all household income classes (2014 to 2016) 
(Department of Statistics, Malaysia, 2019). In the same 
survey, it was found that the B40 income group spent 
11.4% on restaurant and hotels, as compared to 13.2% 
(T20) and 13.0% (M40), respectively (Noorhaslinda, Nor 
Fatimah & Nur Aﬁ fah, 2018; Department of Statistics 
Malaysia, 2019).    
 
Recent studies such as the MANS 2014 (Institute for 
Public Health, 2014) and Malaysian Food Barometer 
Survey (Fournier et al., 2016) have examined eating out 
closely. MANS 2014 found almost half of Malaysian adults 
obtain food outside home, higher among those live in 
Peninsular Malaysia and in urban areas. Speciﬁcally, the 
survey showed that only 50.7% of adults reported that 
their source of breakfast was home prepared, and the 
remaining (49.3%) were obtained outside; 24.9% (stall), 
11.8% (cafeteria) and 10.1% (restaurant). Higher 
percentages were observed for lunch where 59.8% of 
adults reported that their source of lunch was home 
prepared, 17.5% obtained from restaurant, 14.2% from 
stall, while 11.3% from the cafeteria. The percentage of 
those who took dinner at home was signiﬁcantly higher 
among the respondents in East Malaysia (93.7%) and rural 
areas (92.1%). While, 9.3% and 7.5% of adults in Peninsular 
Malaysia reported that their sources of dinner were 
obtained from restaurant and stall, respectively (Institute 
for Public Health, 2014). Findings from the Malaysian 
Food Barometer Survey were consistent with MANS 2014 
with high prevalence of food away from home reported. 
About 64% of Malaysians had at least one meal per day 
outside of home, 23.4% had meals at home, and 12.5% will 
eat at home with outside food (Fournier et al., 2016).  
The new practices of eating out observed in Malaysia can 
be identiﬁ ed and categorised in terms of the place of 
eating, time of eating, food types and the food outlets. The 
place of eating is related to food businesses available in 
the urban environment with fast food restaurants being 
one of the common features. Besides the normal meal 
hours, the time of eating is no longer restricted to 
mealtime as food services is always available. The 
presence of 24-hour restaurants has encouraged 
teenagers, late sleepers or night workers to take their 
meal at late night or early mornings. Diff erent food 
premises offer varieties of food to be chosen, therefore has 
driven the urban people to frequently patronising cafe, 
restaurants or stalls throughout the day (Noraziah & 
Mohd Azlan, 2017). However, there is increasing evidence 
suggesting that the nutritional proﬁ le of food off ered 
outside determines the overall diet hence eating out can 
increase the probability of eating healthily provided 
healthy options are offered (Boo, Chan & Fatimah, 2008; 
Lachat et al., 2012). 
 
A study conducted at Selangor, it was found that majority 
(91.2%) of adolescents had family meals away from home 
at least once a week either at restaurants (53%), fast food 
outlets (41.6%), food courts in shopping complexes (40%) 
or food stalls (30.2%) (Lim, Mohd Sharif & Lim, 2013). In a 
study amongst Malaysian female university students, a 
high proportion of consumers were choosing chicken and 
ﬁsh items may be speciﬁc to the student population who 
generally understand that white meat (e.g., ﬁ sh and 
chicken) was healthier than red meat (e.g., lamb and beef) 
(Boo, Chan & Fatimah, 2008). Nonetheless, the popularity 
of these two categories of food may be attributed to the 
unique multicultural background of Malaysia. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
87Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
4.5 Key Recommendations  
Key Recommendation 1 
 
Make cooking habit as part of your healthy 
lifestyle daily. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. Plan your weekly menus to cook at home. 
This makes it easier to buy necessary 
groceries at least once a week.  
 
2. Allocate time for nutritious food 
preparation and start with simple recipes. 
 
3. Prepare ingredients such as onions,
 garlic, 
chilies and ginger beforehand,  and 
refrigerate and cover in separate 
containers. 
 
4. Learn basic cooking skills from attending 
basic cooking classes or from reliable 
online resources, videos or other website 
related to healthy cooking recipes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Recommendation 2 
 
Cook nutritious foods at home every day. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. Cook daily. If you can’t, cook more portions 
on weekends and freeze them in batches 
for easy thawing
. 
 
2. Select simple recipes that you can handle. 
One-pot meals that contain grains, 
chicken/ ﬁsh/ meat and vegetables are easy 
to make and are rather balanced. 
 
3. Replace instant spices with natural 
marinated recipes by using herbs, spices 
and natural ﬂavours like lemon juice to add 
ﬂavour to your dishes, with no additional 
salt, sugar and ﬂavour enhancer. 
 
Key Recommendation 3 
 
Bring home-cooked foods daily to workplace,
 
higher learning institutions and schools.  
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. Establish a new habit for all family 
members to bring home-cooked food to 
workplace,
 higher learning institutions and 
schools to save money and eat healthier 
and safe food.   
 
2. Plan and prepare simple menu when 
bringing home-cooked foods for breakfast/ 
snack/ lunch/ dinner time for the whole 
week. Create a daily menu schedule 
because the same menu every day will be 
boring. 
 
3. Prepare only for individual portion when 
bringing home-cooked foods to practice 
eating within the correct serving size daily. 
 
4. Invite other co-worker, peers and friends to 
bring home-cooked food and exchange 
dishes like the ‘pot luck’ concept to make 
it more fun. 
88 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Key Recommendation 4 
 
Choose healthier options daily when eating out or purchasing foods from outside.  
 
How to Achieve 
1. Eat or order food from eateries or online food 
deliveries that offer variety, safe and healthy food. 
Avoid eating or ordering foods late at night. 
 
2. Choose clean and healthy eateries with grade A 
rating or eateries with Ministry of Health’s 
initiative such as Healthy Cafeteria, BeSS or having 
menus with MyChoice logo. 
 
3. Request for smaller portions or share foods with 
others if small portions are unavailable. 
 
4. Use smaller plates to avoid overeating especially 
when eating in buffet-style or during open houses. 
 
5. Portion meals according to the Malaysian Healthy 
Plate (MOH, 2016) recommendation of “quarter 
quarter half”. Fill in the ﬁrst quarter of your plate 
with rice/ other cereals (e.g: meehoon)/ wholegrain 
cereal-based products (e.g: wholegrain bread)/ 
tubers (e.g: sweet potato). It is recommended to ﬁll 
in this ﬁ rst quarter with whole grains. Fill in the 
second quarter of your plate with ﬁ sh/ poultry/ 
meat/ legumes (e.g: dhall, tempeh, soy beancurd)/ 
dairy products. Fill the other half of your plate with 
vegetables and fruits. Give priority to vegetable 
and fruits.. 
 
6. Request or choose foods that are cooked using 
healthier cooking methods such as grilled, 
steamed and baked. For example, choose plain rice 
instead of nasi minyak (briyani). Be cautious of the 
menu with wordings like ‘golden’, ‘crunchy’, 
‘crispy’,’ breaded’, ‘crumbed’, ‘batter-fried’ and 
‘fried’ as most of the cooking method involve 
deep-frying loaded with of cooking oil.  
 
7. Limit high sodium content foods such as salted 
egg, salted ﬁsh, sambal belacan, budu and other 
preserved foods.  
 
8. Request for plain water to go with your meals 
instead of sweet sugary drinks such as cordials, 
Air Batu Campur (ABC), carbonated sodas, cendol, 
drinks with whipped cream, milk shakes and 
bubble tea.  
 
9. Request for unsweetened drinks or reduced sugar 
content (‘kurang manis’). Substitute condensed 
milk with evaporated milk such as ‘teh C’.  
 
10. Drink Chinese tea, teh ‘O’, or teh ‘O’ with lime 
juice without added sugar if you wish to have 
ﬂavoured beverages. 
 
11. Avoid misuse of free reﬁ ll drinks that usually are 
sugar-laden drinks. 
 
12. Limit adding condiments such as soy sauce, chilli 
sauce, monosodium glutamate and mayonnaise on 
to your food. This will increase your sodium intake. 
 
13. Avoid foods which are added or coated with 
grated cheese, cheese sauce or chocolate. These 
foods contain high sodium, fat and sugar. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
89Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
4.6 References 
 
Abdul-Mutalib NA, Syaﬁnaz AN, Sakai K & Shirai Yan (2015). Overview of foodborne illness and food safety in 
Malaysia. Int Food Res J 22(3):896-901. 
 
Bezerra IN & Sichieri R (2009). Eating out of home and obesity: A Brazilian nationwide survey. Public Health Nutr 
12(11):2037-2043. 
 
Birch LL & Davison KK (2001). Family environmental factors inﬂuencing the developing behavioral controls of 
food intake and childhood overweight. Pediatr Clin North Am 48(4):893-907. 
 
Blumenthal K & Volpp KG (2010). Enhancing the effectiveness of food labeling in restaurants. JAMA 303(6):553-
564. 
 
Boo HC, Chan LT & Fatimah U (2008). Healthy eating away-from-home: E ffects of dining occasion and the 
number of menu items. Int Food Res J 15(2):201-208. 
 
Bowers D (2000). Cooking trends echo changing roles of women. Food Review 23:23-29. 
 
Brown J & Hermann JR (2005). Cooking classes increase fruit and vegetable intake and food safety behaviors 
in youth and adults. J Am Diet Assoc 37(2):104-105. 
 
Dahye Kim & Byeong-il Ahn (2020). Eating out and consumers’ health: Evidence on obesity and balanced 
nutrition intakes. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 17:586. doi:10.3390/ijerph17020586. 
 
Department of Statistics, Malaysia (2019). Report on Household Expenditure Survey 2019. Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia.  (Accessed 16 July 2020). 
 
Euromonitor (2015). 100% Home Delivery/Takeaway in Malaysia.  (Accessed 30 October 2020). 
 
Fournier T, Tibère L, Laporte C, Mognard E, Ismail MN, Sharif SP & Poulain JP (2016). Eating patterns and 
prevalence of obesity. Lessons learned from the Malaysian Food Barometer. Appetite 107:362-371. 
 
Institute for Public Health (IPH) (2014). The National Health and Morbidity Survey 2014: Malaysian Adult 
Nutrition Survey (MANS) Vol II Survey Findings. Institute for Public Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, 
Kuala Lumpur.  
 
Jeemon P, Prabhakaran D, Mohan V, Thankappan KR, Joshi PP, Ahmed F, Chaturvedi V & Reddy KS (2009). Double 
burden of underweight and overweight among children (10-19 years of age) of employees working in 
Indian industrial units. Natl Med J India 22:172-176. 
 
Kinsey JD (1994). Food and families socioeconomic-status. J Nutr 124(Suppl 9):S1878-S1885. 
 
Lachat C, Khanh LN, Khan NC, Dung NQ, Van Anh ND, Roberfroid D & Kolsteren P (2009). Eating out of home 
in Vietnamese adolescents: Socioeconomic factors and dietary associations. Am J Clin Nutr 90(6):1648-
1655. 
 
Lachat C, Nago E, Verstraeten R, Roberfroid D, Van Camp J & Kolsteren P (2012). Eating out of home and its 
association with dietary intake: A systematic review of the evidence. Obes Rev 13:329-346. 
 
Larson NI, Neumark-Sztainer D, Hannan PJ & Story M (2007). Family meals during adolescence are associated 
with higher diet quality and healthful meal patterns during young adulthood. J Am Diet Assoc 
107(9):1502-1510. 
 
Larson NI, Story M, Wall M & Neumark-Sztainer D (2006). Calcium and dairy intakes of adolescents are 
associated with their home environment, taste preferences, personal health beliefs, and meal patterns J 
Am.Diet.Assoc 106(11):1816-1824. 
 
Laska MN, Larson NI, Neumark-Sztainer D & Story M (2012). Does involvement in food preparation track from 
adolescence to young adulthood and is it associated with better dietary quality? Findings from a 10-
year longitudinal study.  Public Health Nutr 15(7):1150-1157. 
 
90 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Ledikwe JH, Ello-Martin JA & Rolls BJ (2005). Portion sizes and the obesity epidemic. J Nutr 135(4):905-909.  
 
Li M, Dibley MJ, Sibbritt DW & Yan H (2010) Dietary habits and overweight/obesity in adolescents in Xi’an City, 
China. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr 19(1):76-82. 
 
Lim C, Mohd Sharif Z & Lim MY (2013). Relationship between family meals away from home and nutritional 
status of adolescents. Mal J Nutr 19(1):25-35. 
 
McLaughlin C, Tarasuk V & Kreiger N (2003). An examination of at-home food preparation activity among low-
income, food-insecure women. J Am Diet Assoc 103(11):1506-1512. 
 
MOH (KKM) (2016). Panduan Pinggan Sihat Malaysia. Kementerian Kesihatan Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
 
Monsivais P, Aggarwal A & Drewnowski A (2014). Time spent on home food preparation and indicators of healthy 
eating. Am J Prev Med 47(6):796-802. 
 
Nejati M & Moghaddam PP (2013). The effect of hedonic and utilitarian values on satisfaction and behavioural 
intentions for dining in fast-casual restaurants in Iran. Br Food J 115(11):1583-1596. 
 
Noraziah A & Mohd Azlan A (2017). The food consumption and eating behaviour of Malaysian urbanites: Issues 
and concerns. Geograﬁa Malays. J Soc Space 8(6):157-165. 
 
Noorhaslinda KAR, Nor Fatimah CS & Nur Aﬁfah R (2018). Survivability through basic needs consumption among 
Muslim households B40, M40 and T20 income groups. Pertanika J.Soc Sci.& Hum 26(2):985-998.   
 
Nurul-Fadhilah A, Teo P & Foo LH (2016). Ethnic differences in the food intake patterns and its associated factors 
of adolescents in Kelantan, Malaysia. Nutrients 8(9):551. 
 
Popkin BM, Adair LS & Ng SW. (2012). Global nutrition transition and the pandemic of obesity in developing 
countries. Nutr Rev 70(1):3. 
 
Prentice AM & Jebb SA (2003). Fast foods, energy density and obesity: A possible mechanistic link. Obes Rev 
4:187-94.  
 
Raber M, Chandra J, Upadhyaya M, Schick V, Strong LL, Durand C & Sharma S (2016). An evidence-based 
conceptual framework of healthy cooking. Prev Med Rep 4:23-28. 
 
Reicks M, Kocher M & Reeder J (2018). Impact of cooking and home food preparation interventions among 
adults: A systematic review (2011–2016). J Nutr Educ Behav 50(2):148-172. 
 
Shan XY, Xi B, Cheng H, Hou DQ, Wang Y & Mi J (2010). Prevalence and behavioral risk factors of overweight 
and obesity among children aged 218 in Beijing, China. Int J Pediatr Obes 5:383-389. 
 
Swinburn BA, Sacks G, Hall KD, McPherson K, Finegood DT, Moodie ML & Gortmaker SL (2011). The global 
obesity pandemic: Shaped by global drivers and local environments.  Lancet 378:804-814. 
 
Tan AK (2010). Demand for food-away-from-home in Malaysia: A sample selection analysis by ethnicity and 
gender. J Foodserv Bus Res. 13(3):252-67. 
 
van’t Riet H, den Hartog AP & van Staveren W (2002). Non-home prepared foods: Contribution to energy and 
nutrient intake of consumers living in two low-income areas in Nairobi. Public Health Nutr 5(4):515-22. 
 
Wang Y & Lobstein T (2006). Worldwide trends in childhood overweight and obesity. Int J Pediatr Obes 1(1):11-
25. 
 
Wolfson JA, Leung CW & Richardson CR (2020). More frequent cooking at home is associated with higher 
Healthy Eating Index-2015 score. Public Health Nutr 1-11.  
 
WHO (2002). WHO Global Strategy for Food Safety. Food Safety Department, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland. 
 
Yang WY, Williams LT, Collins CE & WSS Chee (2011). Association between obesity and dietary patterns in 
children of developing countries in Asia: A systematic review. JBI Libr Syst Rev 9(64 Suppl):1-12. 
91Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
KEY 
MESSAGE
5
Eat plenty of vegetables and 
fruits everyday
92 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
5.1 Terminology 
Fruits  
 
The term fruit is generally used to describe the 
sweet, ﬂeshy edible portion of a plant that arises 
from the base of the 
ﬂower and surrounds the 
seeds. Examples of fruits are bananas, papayas, 
apples, oranges and others. Most fruits are eaten 
fresh and raw when they are ripe which give them 
a sweet taste. In some cases, they are consumed 
before the fruits ripen, usually with a spicy or 
savoury dip. Some ripe and unripe fruits are used 
in cooking or incorporated into salads which can 
offer a tasty alternative. Fruits can also be 
consumed as canned fruits, dried fruits and fruit 
juice, preferably without added sugar and 
preservatives. Concentrated fruit juice and fruit 
jam which are usually added with sugar during 
processing are excluded as they do not retain any 
nutritional values of the original food.  
 
Plenty 
 
Plenty is deﬁ ned by frequency and quantity. By 
frequency, it means as often as possible
, or eating 
at every meal. In terms of quantity, it implies at 
least three servings of vegetables and two servings 
of fruits every day.  In practice, it means having 
vegetables and fruits during meal times as well as 
for snacks.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55
KEY MESSAGE
EAT PLENTY OF VEGETABLES 
AND FRUITS EVERYDAY
Dr. Yasmin B.H. Ooi, Assoc. Prof. Dr. Aryati Ahmad, Assoc. Prof. Dr. Foo Leng Huat,  
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Gan Wan Ying and Ms. Aznita Izma Mohd Arif.
Vegetables 
 
Vegetables refer to the edible portions of plants 
such as leaves, stems,
 tubers, roots, ﬂ owers and 
bulbs. Vegetables include all fresh, green leafy 
vegetables (such as spinach and lettuce), coloured 
vegetables (such as red spinach), fruit vegetables 
[also known as gourds or melons, such as 
pumpkin, loofah (petola) and cucumber], bean 
vegetables (such as long beans), cruciferous 
vegetables (such as cabbages and broccoli), ulam-
ulam [such as pegaga (Centella asiatica) and ulam 
raja (Cosmos caudataus )] and edible plant stems 
(such as celery and asparagus). There are fruits, in 
a botanical sense, which are treated as vegetables 
in cooking, for example tomatoes and brinjals.  
This deﬁ nition does not include tubers (such as 
potatoes, tapioca and yam) (WHO, 2003). 
Vegetables are also sometimes sold as canned or 
frozen. Some vegetables are eaten raw; others are 
cooked to make them more palatable and 
digestible, sometimes in combination with other 
food groups (such as eggs, meat, ﬁsh or legumes). 
Vegetables can also be consumed as juice, 
preferably without added sugar and/ or salt. 
 
 
5.2 Introduction 
 
It has always been widely accepted that vegetables and 
fruits are “good for you” and consistent scientiﬁ c data 
point to a close association between fruit and vegetable 
consumption and various desirable health outcomes. A 
variety of vegetables and fruits should be consumed 
because no single vegetable or fruit contains all nutrients 
and bioactive substances. For example, green leafy 
vegetables are good sources of folate; yellow and orange 
fruit vegetables provide carotenoids; cruciferous 
vegetables are rich in dithiolethiones and isothiocyanates; 
fruits have bioﬂavonoids and citrus fruits have vitamin C. 
Carotenoids from consumption of vegetables and fruits 
have been shown to increase plasma concentrations of 
interferon, and decreased macrophage inﬂ ammatory 
protein and tumour necrosis (Jahns et al., 20181}). In 
attacks from novel infections that compromise the 
inﬂammatory homeostasis, it is speculated that long term 
consumption of vegetables and fruits may confer 
beneﬁcial anti-inﬂ ammatory and immunomodulatory 
effects (Zabetakis et al., 2020). Vegetables and fruits are 
also good sources of dietary ﬁbre (Dreher, 2018) and other 
yet unknown substances which are beneﬁcial to health.  
 
Preferably, vegetables should be consumed fresh, if 
possible. Antioxidant activity declines in stored 
vegetables at ambient or chill temperatures. Blanching 
and freezing, for example of peas and spinach, reduced 
water-soluble antioxidant acidity by 30 and 50% 
respectively.  However, the antioxidant levels remained 
constant if stored at -20
oC (Hunter & Fletcher, 2002).  
Frozen vegetables could also be used as considerable 
levels of nutrients are retained by freezing, particularly 
when they are frozen when fresh. Vitamin C, pro-vitamin 
A and total folate content in various frozen vegetables and 
fruits were more often better retained than in fresh 
vegetables and fruits which had been refrigerated for 5 
days (Li et al., 2017). For healthy populations, it is not 
advisable to replace vegetables and fruits with 
supplements.  
 
Certain nutrients and phytochemicals in vegetables are 
damaged by cooking.  Consumption of raw salads and 
ulam-ulam prevent such nutrient loss. When consumed 
raw, vegetables must always be washed properly. In some 
cases, cooking increases nutrient availability, for example, 
carotenoids from cooked tomatoes are absorbed better 
than from raw ones. When vegetables are cooked, they 
should not be overcooked since this will cause nutrient 
loss. Stir-frying using a small amount of oil is an effective 
method of cooking vegetables. It provides a tasty dish 
with good texture and most importantly it minimises 
nutrient loss. The small amount of oil used will enhance 
absorption of the fat-soluble vitamins (for example, 
vitamins A and E) and other fat-soluble dietary 
components such as carotenoids. Stir-frying should be the 
preferred cooking method compared to deep-frying and 
prolonged boiling of vegetables (Putriani et al., 2020).  
93Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
94 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
5.3 Scientiﬁc basis 
 
5.3.1 Cardiovascular disease 
Meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies suggested 
that dietary factors such as vegetable and fruit intake may 
have a protective eff ect against risk of cardiovascular 
diseases (Dauchet et al., 2006; He 
et al., 2007; Wang et al., 
2014; Zhan et al., 2017) and with particular analyses for 
stroke (Dauchet, Amouyel & Dallongeville, 2005; He et al., 
2006; Hu et al., 2014) and coronary heart disease (He et 
al., 2007; Gan et al., 2015). These studies showed that the 
risk of coronary heart disease (CHD) is signiﬁ cantly 
increased with lower intakes of vegetables and fruits.  
Cardiovascular diseases are the principal cause of death 
globally. The World Health Organization estimated that 
17.9 million people died from CVDs in 2016, which 
represented 31% of all global deaths. Of these deaths, 85% 
were due to heart attack and stroke (WHO, 2017). 
Coronary heart disease (CHD) is the most important 
manifestation of arteriosclerosis and was regarded as a 
major cause of disease mortality worldwide, including in 
Malaysia. Ischaemic heart disease remained the principal 
cause of death in Malaysia; 15.6% of total deaths in 2018 
were attributed to this (Department of Statistics, Malaysia, 
2019).   
 
Meta-analyses consistently showed evidence that an 
intake of > 400 g/day of vegetables and fruits could 
reduce risk of cardiovascular diseases. Aune et al. (2017) 
showed in their meta-analysis of 95 published prospective 
studies from across the world that the reduction in risk 
for coronary heart disease, stroke and cardiovascular 
disease were 16%, 28% and 22% for an intake of 500 g per 
day of vegetables and fruits. A further reduction in risk, of 
approximately 5 to 8% were reported for these three 
diseases for an intake of 800 g/day of vegetables and 
fruits. There was an approximately linear association 
between vegetable consumption and 28% reductions in 
relative risk at intakes of 600 g/day of vegetables. When 
consumption of vegetables and fruits were at 800 g/day, 
there was also a 28% reduction in relative risk; this 
association was not linear, with steeper inverse 
associations at lower levels of intake. There were 
signiﬁcant dose-response associations between 
vegetable and fruit intakes and total reported 
cardiovascular deaths; whereby signiﬁcant reductions in 
risk was observed when consumption of vegetables and 
fruits and were up to 800 g/day (Aune et al., 2017; Aune, 
2019). Based on these ﬁndings Aune (2019) suggested that 
recommendations for daily consumption of vegetables 
and fruits could be up to 800 g/day, or equivalent to ten 
servings of 80 g each as part of a healthy diet. Hu et al. 
(2014) in their meta-analysis of 20 prospective cohort 
studies showed a signiﬁcant risk reduction of 21% among 
participants with the highest intake of vegetables and 
fruits compared to those at the lowest intake. They 
reported a linear dose-response relationship; the risk of 
stroke decreased by 11% and 32% for every 200 g/day 
increment in vegetable and fruit intake respectively. The 
RR (95% CI) of stroke was 0.97 (0.95-1.00) for 50 g/day of 
vegetable consumption compared to 0.80 (0.62-1.02) for 
400 g/day. The RR (95% CI) of stroke was 0.90 (0.84-0.96) 
for 50 g/day of fruit consumption compared to 0.45 (0.28-
0.74) for 400 g/day.   
 
In a longitudinal study of Swedish adults, Larsson et al. 
(2013) reported signiﬁcant inverse relationships between 
total vegetable and fruit intakes and the risk of stroke, 
cerebral infarction and haemorrhagic stroke. Those with 
the highest vegetable and fruit intake had a 13% lower 
risk of all causes stroke compared with those in the lowest 
intake group and the risk of stroke was signiﬁ cantly 
reduced with increasing consumption of vegetables and 
fruits of at least 5 servings a day.  However, there remains 
uncertainty about the magnitude of the beneﬁ t of 
vegetable and fruit intake on the occurrence of CVD 
because evidence from randomised controlled trials were 
inconclusive. Part of this inconclusiveness could be 
attributable to confounding factors such as the manner 
in which vegetables and fruits were prepared and eaten, 
the large variety of vegetables and fruits consumed 
globally, the diff erence in their nutrient contents, and 
potential interactions with other dietary components 
(Alissa & Ferns, 2017).   
 
95Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Most studies have reported inverse association or no 
association between intake of various vegetable groups 
and CVD, atherosclerotic vascular diseases, CHD, heart 
disease and stroke. The vegetable groups were green 
leafy vegetables, cruciferous vegetables, allium 
vegetables, yellow-orange-red vegetables, legumes. 
These are summarised in a narrative review of recent 
prospective cohorts (Blekkenhorst et al., 2018). Aune et al. 
(2017) showed that high vs low intake of apples/ pears, 
citrus fruits, carrots and non-cruciferous vegetables were 
inversely associated with risk of cardiovascular diseases, 
and canned fruits were positively associated.  Hu et al. 
(2014) showed inverse association between the risk of 
stroke and citrus fruits [0.72 (0.59-0.88)], leafy vegetables 
[0.88 (0.79-0.98)], and apples/ pears [0.88 (0.81-0.97)], but 
not with cruciferous vegetables [0.85 (0.64-1.13)], onion/ 
leek/ garlic [0.89 (0.79-1.01)], root vegetables [1.04 (0.91-
1.18)], and berries [1.05 (0.86-1.27)].  However, Gan et al. 
(2015) showed that the inverse associations between total 
vegetable and fruit, vegetable or fruit consumption were 
not observed in Asian countries. They suggested that 
Asian cooking which mostly boiled and steamed 
vegetables may lead to loss of water-soluble, heat 
sensitive and oxygen-labile nutrients, higher usage of salt 
may decrease the beneﬁ ts of vegetables, and higher 
consumption of vegetables and fruits in the Western 
studies compared to Asian studies.   
 
One prospective cohort study, the Prospective Urban 
Rural Epidemiology (PURE) with 135,335 individuals from 
across the world found that higher fruit consumption was 
associated with a lower risk of CVD, non-CVD and total 
mortality. Raw vegetable intake was strongly associated 
with a lower risk of total mortality, but the bene ﬁt was 
smaller for cooked vegetable intake (Miller et al., 2017).  
Similar ﬁndings were observed in a population-based 
study in the Netherlands, where higher consumption of 
vegetables and fruits, either in raw or processed foods, 
exerted a protective effect against the incidence of CHD. 
About 34% lower risk of CHD incidence was seen among 
adults with high intake of total vegetables and fruits (> 
475 g/d) compared to those with a low total vegetables 
and fruits consumption (≤ 241 g/d) (Griep et al., 2010).   
 
 
5.3.2 Hypertension 
 
Hypertension continues to represent a growing public 
health concern nationwide and worldwide. High systolic 
blood pressure (SBP) was the leading risk factor
, 
accounting for 10.4 million (95% uncertainty interval [UI] 
9.39-11.5) deaths and 218 million Disability Adjusted Life-
Years (DALYs) in the Global Burden of Disease 2017 risk 
factors. High SBP was the leading Level 4 risk factor for 
age-standardised DALY rates in Southeast Asia, as well 
as central Europe, eastern Europe, central Asia, north 
Africa and Middle East, south Asia, east Asia and Oceania 
(GBP 2017 Risk Factor Collaborators, 2018). In Malaysia, 
based on the NHMS 2019, the overall prevalence of 
hypertension was 30.0% (95% CI = 28.57, 31.50) (IPH, 
2020).  
 
Meta-analyses and systematic reviews have shown an 
inverse association between vegetable and fruit 
consumption and the risk of hypertension (Hartley et al., 
2013; Li et al., 2016; Wu, Sun & He, 2016; Schwingshackl 
et al., 2017). A meta-analysis (28 cohort studies) observed 
an inverse association for the risk of hypertension for 100 
g of fruits daily by 3% (Schwingshackl et al., 2017). Li et al. 
(2016) reported that the pooled relative risk (RR) of 
hypertension for the highest vs. the lowest consumption 
of vegetables and fruits was 0.81 (95% CI = 0.74-0.89). 
From their meta-analysis of 25 studies comprising of 
cross-sectional and case-control studies, Li et al. (2016) 
showed a signiﬁ cant inverse association between 
vegetable and fruit consumption and risk of hypertension 
(RR = 0.70, 95% CI = 0.61-0.79) (Li et al., 2016).  Wu, Su & 
He (2016) in their meta-analysis showed that the 
incidence risk of hypertension decreased by 1.9% for each 
serving of fruit consumption daily, and decreased by 1.2% 
for each serving of total vegetable and fruit consumption 
daily. A Cochrane systematic review found that the 
consumption of ≥  5 servings of vegetables and fruits 
signiﬁcantly reduced mean systolic BP by 3.0 mmHg 
compared to low vegetable and fruit intake (Hartley et al., 
2013).    
 
Several cohort studies have proven the long-term e ffect 
of vegetables and fruits in reducing hypertension risk 
(Wang et al., 2012; Borgi et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2018; Kim 
& Kim, 2018; Steﬂ er et al., 2019). The ﬁ ndings have 
generally shown an association between high 
consumption of vegetables and fruits and low risk of 
hypertension. Based on the ﬁ ndings from three large 
longitudinal cohort studies: Nurses’ Health Study (n = 
62,175), Nurses’ Health Study II (n = 88,475), and Health 
Professionals Follow-up Study (n = 36,803), the pooled 
hazard ratios (HRs) for hypertension incidence among 
participants who consumed ≥  4 servings/day of total 
whole fruits were 0.92 (95% CI = 0.87-0.97) and 0.95 (95% 
CI = 0.86-1.04) for total vegetable as compared to those 
who consumed ≤ 4 servings/day (Borgi et al., 2016). When 
vegetables and fruits were combined into one intake 
category, higher consumption (≥  6 servings/day) was 
associated with a lower risk of developing hypertension 
(HR = 0.89, 95% CI = 0.86-0.93) when compared to ≤  1 
serving/day. Speciﬁ cally, higher intakes (≥  4 
servings/week as compared to < 1 serving/month) of 
raisins/ grapes, apples/ pears, blueberries, avocados, 
broccoli, carrots, and tofu/ soybeans were associated with 
a decreased risk of hypertension.   
  
The Korean Genome and Epidemiology Study (KoGES) 
which was an 8-year follow up study found that a higher 
intake of fruits was prospectively associated with a lower 
risk of hypertension in middle-aged and older Korean 
adults regardless of sex, however, no association between 
vegetable consumption and risk of incident hypertension 
was reported (Kim & Kim, 2018). Similarly, the Women’s 
Health Study (WHS) in Boston also showed that total 
fruits but not total vegetables signi ﬁcantly reduced the 
risk of hypertension after adjusting for lifestyle factors and 
other food intake (Wang et al., 2012). In another 
longitudinal study, the China Health and Nutrition Survey, 
96 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
fruit intake was more strongly and signiﬁcantly associated 
with lowering BP than vegetable intake (Liu et al., 2018). 
A 12-year follow-up of 8,997 men and women in the 
Health, Alcohol and Psychosocial Factors in Eastern 
Europe Prospective Cohort Study found that fruit intake 
was inversely related to both systolic and diastolic blood 
pressure at baseline (mean SBP and DBP was 3.5 mmHg 
and 1.4 mmHg lower in the highest compared to the 
lowest intake tertiles). However, it was not associated 
with blood pressure change over time. In addition, no 
signiﬁcant association was found between vegetable 
intake and blood pressure, neither cross-sectionally nor 
longitudinally (Steﬂ er et al., 2019). One possible 
explanation for the non-association is the complicated 
processing involved in the preparation of vegetables for 
consumption. The added fats, salt and seasonings and the 
cooking method may have off set part of the beneﬁ cial 
effects of fresh vegetables (Wang et al., 2012; Steﬂer et al., 
2019).  
 
Findings from the National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey (NHANES) 2007-2014 among 18,433 
US adults aged ≥ 18 years revealed that vegetable ﬁ bre 
intake was associated with a decreased risk of 
hypertension but not fruit ﬁbre, in which 0.052 g/kg/day of 
vegetable ﬁbre showed a positive effect on hypertension 
risk (OR = 0.76; 95% CI = 0.63-0.99) (Sun et al., 2018). 
However, a systematic review and meta-analysis of 
randomised controlled trials found that viscous soluble 
ﬁbre intake including fruit pectin signiﬁcantly reduced the 
overall systolic BP by 1.6 mmHg and diastolic BP by 0.4 
mmHg in all populations (Khan et al., 2018). 
 
The association between vegetable and fruit intake and 
blood pressure could probably be explained by the rich 
nutrient content of vegetables and fruits such as 
potassium, ﬁbre, magnesium, folic acid, calcium and 
vitamin C which have been found to be associated with 
blood pressure lowering e ffects through various routes 
such as improving endothelial function, causing 
vasodilation, modulating barore ﬂex sensitivity and 
increasing antioxidant activity (Li et al., 2016).  
Furthermore, increased vegetable and fruit consumption 
may increase the intake of dietary ﬁ bre and reduce the 
intake of fat, in which low fat intake has been found to be 
associated with reduced risk of hypertension (Nestel, 
2019). 
 
 
5.3.3 Cancers 
 
Cancer is now known as one of the most common non-
communicable diseases (NCD) worldwide. It has emerged 
as the second highest cause of death among Malaysians. 
The three most common cancers among men in Malaysia 
in 2018 were lung (16.6%),
 colorectum (16.2%), and 
prostate (8.8%); whilst the three most common cancers 
among women were breast (32.7%), colorectum (12%) and 
cervix uteri (7.2%) (IARC, 2020). The prevalence is 
expected to increase in the near future due to the increase 
in NCD risk factors and an aging population. Cancer risk 
factors are generally similar worldwide which commonly 
include smoking, insuffi cient physical activity, alcohol, 
diet, overweight and obesity, and infections. 
Nevertheless, the prevalence of risk factors may vary by 
region and country contributing to variation in overall 
cancer incidence rates including the most common types 
of cancer. Despite the risk factors, there are also factors 
that are linked with lower incidence or risk of cancer, 
which are known as protective factors.  
  
The protective eff ects of vegetables and fruits against 
cancer have been shown since 1975 (Armstrong & Doll, 
1975; Bjelke, 1975). Since then, many pooled studies 
continued to show this eff ect. A review of 156 studies 
showed that individuals with low fruit and vegetable 
intake have nearly twice the risk of cancer at any sites 
compared to those with a higher intake, after controlling 
for potential confounding factors (Block, Patterson & 
Subar, 1992). The protective eff ects of vegetables and 
fruits were linked with several plausible mechanisms 
such as reduced oxidative damage of DNA or increased 
enzyme activity to detoxify carcinogens (Steinmetz & 
Potter, 1991).  
97Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
 A meta-analysis showed an 8 to 18% reduction in lung 
cancer risk with higher intakes of vegetables and fruits, 
although the positive effect decreased when stratiﬁed by 
smoking status (Vieira et al., 2016). A more recent study 
found that pre-diagnosis fruit intake was associated with 
borderline decrease in risk of total death from breast 
cancer among women, but not vegetables (He, Gu & 
Zhang, 2017). Similarly, a prospective cohort study 
involving > 500,000 participants from ten European 
countries concluded that the risk of cancers of the upper 
gastrointestinal tract was inversely associated with fruit 
intake only (Bradbury et al., 2014). In contrast, the latest 
review indicated that low vegetable and fruit 
consumption was associated with 17.6% of oral cavity/ 
pharyngeal cancers, 17.4% of laryngeal cancers, and 8.9% 
of lung cancers (Islami et al., 2018). 
  
The protective effects of vegetables and fruits may be due 
to biologically active compounds such as ﬂ avonoids 
which contain antioxidants (Vieira et al., 2016).  
Vegetables and fruits contain signiﬁ cant amounts of 
phytochemical compounds such as phenolics and 
triterpenoids, the anti-inﬂammatory properties which are 
beneﬁcial to counter in ﬂammatory response (Zhu, Du & 
Xu, 2018). Human studies are still needed to test the anti-
inﬂammatory activity of these compounds in humans. In 
addition, other potential mechanisms related to protective 
effects of vegetables and fruits may be related to high 
intake of ﬁbres, and micronutrients such as vitamins C, E, 
and folate (He, Gu & Zhang, 2017).  
 
A healthy diet should consist of adequate amounts of 
vegetables and fruits due to its potential protective 
effects. Although, additional vegetable and fruit intake 
may not have much eff ect on cancer risks especially 
when confounded by smoking and alcohol intake, a 
moderate intake of vegetables and fruits may lower risk of 
many common cancers, especially of the digestive tract 
(Vieira et al., 2016; Turati et al., 2015). The WCRF/ AICR 
recommended that people should eat mostly foods from 
plant origin, which includes at least ﬁve portions/ servings 
a day of non-starchy unprocessed vegetables and fruits 
(Hastert & White 2016; Norat et al., 2014). In agreement 
with that, another systematic review concluded that 
either combination or separate intake of vegetables and 
fruits (600 g/day) reduced the risk of total cancer (0.97, 
95% CI = 0.95-0.99) (Aune et al., 2017).  
 
Consumption of pickled vegetables is associated with 
gastric cancer. A meta-analysis which combined the 
results of cohort studies showed a pooled relative risk of 
gastric cancer incidence of 1.15 (95% CI = 1.07-1.23) for 40 
g/day increment in pickled vegetable intake in a dose-
response manner (Yoo et al., 2020). Other meta-analysis 
also reported an increased risk of gastric cancer 
associated with consumption of pickled vegetables (OR 
= 1.28, 95% CI = 1.09-1.51, Poorolajal et al., 2020); OR = 
1.28, 95% CI = 1.05-1.53, Jim et al., 2010). Yoo et al. (2020) 
and Jim et al. (2010) proposed that the high sodium 
content in pickled vegetables to be the main reason, 
including possibly epithelial damage induced by high 
dietary salt intake. Most meta-analysis on pickled food 
and risk of gastric cancer had been done using East Asian 
case control and prospective studies. The ﬁndings on a 
dose-response relationship are equivocal (D’Elia et al., 
2012; Ren et al., 2012). The latest nationally available data 
for Korea showed that average intake of kimchi in Korea 
was 1363.3 g/day for males and 88.8 g/day for females 
(Kim et al., 2016), which was most probably far higher 
than intake levels in Malaysia. There are no published 
reports on amount of intake of pickled vegetables or 
kimchi for Malaysians. Izzah et al. (2012) reported that the 
frequency of consumption of pickled vegetables by 
Malaysians was very low.   
 
However, there are notable health beneﬁts, such as anti-
atherosclerotic eff ects from kimchi (Kim, Noh & Sang, 
2018). The possible mechanism could be the nutritional 
values of the pickled vegetables and the presence of lactic 
acid bacteria in the fermentation process (Behera et al., 
2020).  F
ermented cabbage contains lactobacilli, which 
are activators of the nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-
like (Nrf2). Nrft2 can block the angiotensin II receptor type 
1 (AT1R) axis which is associated with oxidative stress. 
Viruses such as the SARS-CoV-2 binds with the 
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). 
Downregulation of ACE2 enhances AT1R which causes 
oxidative stress that may lead to a poor prognosis 
(Bousquet et al., 2020). Bosquet et al. proposed that 
fermented cabbage be considered as a proof-of-concept 
of dietary manipulation that may enhance Nrf2-
associated antioxidant effects. Kim et al. (2016) noted that 
there was a downward trend of kimchi consumption 
among Koreans from 1998 to 2012, and concluded that 
there is need for development of low sodium kimchi as 
consumption of pickled vegetables contribute towards 
the achievement of 400 g/day of total vegetables and 
fruits, particularly in Korea. Pickled vegetables may also 
be a good way to preserve vegetables during pandemics 
where short-term shortages may occur. Ozer et al. (2019) 
reported that pickled cabbage contained 109.89  4.74 mg 
ascorbic acid/100 g d.w. and kimchi contained 77.43  2.87 
ascorbic acid/100 g d.w. They also reported that kimchi 
and sauerkraut contained 869.64  70.16 and 438.257  25.05 
mg gallic acid equivalents/100g fresh weight respectively.  
It would be better to drain any pickling liquids to limit 
consumption of salt.   
 
 
5.3.4 Diabetes mellitus 
 
The prevalence of diabetes mellitus in Malaysia has been 
increasing over the period of available nationally 
representative data:  8.3% in adults aged 
≥ 30 years in 
NHMS 1996, 14.9% in adults aged ≥ 30 years in NHMS 
2006 (IPH, 2008), 15.2% (95 CI = 14.3-16.1) in NHMS 2011 
(IPH, 2011), and 18.3% (95% CI = 17.08-19.58) in NHMS 
2019 (IPH, 2020). As insulin resistance is associated with 
dietary ﬁbre intake, meta-analyses of prospective cohorts 
have consistently shown an inverse relationship between 
vegetable and fruit intake and risk of diabetes mellitus 
(Wang et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2015). Wu et al. (2015) showed 
that 2-3 servings/day of vegetables and 2 servings/day of 
fruits conferred a lower risk of diabetes mellitus than other 
levels of vegetable and fruit consumption. They 
standardized each serving as 106 g per portion. Wang et 
al. (2016) showed that a higher intake of fruit, particularly 
berries, and green leafy vegetables, yellow vegetables, 
98 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
cruciferous vegetables, and fruit ﬁ bre were associated 
with a lower risk of diabetes mellitus. Findings from the 
DONALD cohort study which compared fasting blood 
sample provided in adulthood (18-39 years) and data on 
ﬂavonoid intake from vegetables and fruits during 
adolescence (females: 9-15 years; males: 10-16 years) 
showed that higher ﬂavonoid intake from vegetables and 
fruits were related to higher homeostasis model 
assessment insulin sensitivity (HOMA-2%S) among 
females (ptrend = 0.03) but not among males (Pensczynski 
et al., 2019).  They concluded that intake during 
adolescence is associated with a favourable risk pro ﬁle 
for diabetes mellitus in early adulthood.  A 5-year study 
which followed patients newly diagnosed with diabetes 
mellitus (n = 401) showed that increasing vegetable and 
fruit intake following that diagnosis were associated with 
lower cardiovascular risk factors (Lamb et al., 2017).   
 
Findings from a prospective cohort (n = 3,300) showed 
that fresh fruit intake was inversely associated with the 
risk of gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) in Chinese 
pregnant women (Zhou et al., 2019). Individuals in the 
highest quintile of total fruit consumption had an adjusted 
OR of 0.41 (0.27-0.62) compared to individuals in the 
lowest quintile who had an adjusted OR of 0.80 (0.56-1.12) 
(ptrend < 0.001). They reported that every 100 g of total 
fruit consumption was associated with a 14% (95% CI = 8-
20) decrease in OR of GDM. Their evidence suggested 
that women with GDM risk should consume low 
glycaemic index and glycaemic load fresh fruits.  
Randomised control trials (n = 6,513) showed that 
pregnant women who were given daily intake of fruit (4-
60 g of dried fruit) and green leafy vegetables (30 g fresh 
or 7.5g dried) had lower rates of GDM (7.3%) compared to 
women in the control group who were given potatoes and 
onions (12.4%), OR = 0.56 (95% CI = 0.36-0.86, p = 0.008) 
and the reduction in GDM remained signiﬁcant after pre-
pregnancy adiposity and fat or weight gained during 
pregnancy were adjusted for (Sahariah et al., 2016).  
  
This dietary guideline limits unsweetened fruit juice to 
one serving per day as part of the ‘ﬁ ve per day’ 
recommendation for vegetable and fruit intake. A 
systematic review and meta-analysis of 17 cohorts 
involving 38,254 cases/10,126,754 person years, showed 
that consumption of fruit juice was associated with 7% 
greater incidence of diabetes mellitus after adjustment for 
adiposity (Imamura et al., 2015). However, consumption 
of fruit juice had a lower association with incidence of 
diabetes mellitus compared to consumption of sugar 
sweetened beverages, which was reported to be at 13% 
per one serving/day and artiﬁcially sweetened beverages 
at 8%, both after adjustment for adiposity (Imamura et al., 
2015). They however cautioned a potential bias, that is, 
the likelihood of misclassifying sugar sweetened fruit 
drinks such as fruit punch as fruit juice. Epidemiological 
evidence from the EPIC arm in Netherlands found no 
evidence for associations between pure fruit juice and 
fruit consumption and diabetes risk after adjusting for 
overall dietary quality (Scheffers et al., 2020). 
 
 
 
 
5.4 Current status 
 
Despite desirable beneﬁ ts from vegetable and fruit 
consumption, a high prevalence of inadequate 
consumption was reported among adults. Findings from 
the Prospective Urban Rural Epidemiology (PURE) study 
in 18 countries (including Malaysia) found that mean 
intake of vegetables and fruits was 3.76 servings per day 
(Miller et al., 2016). Based on income levels, mean daily 
intake was 2.14 servings in low-income countries 
(Bangladesh, Pakistan, India, and Zimbabwe), 3.17 
servings in lower-middle-income countries (China, Iran, 
Colombia, and Occupied Palestinian Territory), 4.31 
servings in upper-middle-income countries (Malaysia, 
Argentina, Chile, Brazil, Turkey, Poland, and South Africa), 
and 5.42 servings in high-income countries (Canada, 
Sweden, and United Arab Emirates) (Miller et al., 2016).   
 
In Malaysia, the prevalence of inadequate vegetable and/ 
or fruit intake had increased from 92.5% in 2011 (IPH, 
2011) to 94.0% in 2015 (IPH, 2015) among adults in 
Malaysia. The latest NHMS 2019 (IPH, 2020) showed that 
94.9% (95% CI = 93.82-95.79) of adults did not consume 
adequate vegetables and fruits, with more men [95.1% 
(95% CI = 93.14-96.50)] having inadequate intake of 
vegetables and fruits compared to women [94.7% (95% CI 
= 93.44-95.72)]. Only 10.0% of Malaysian adults consumed 
adequate vegetables (≥  3 servings/day), and 9.4% 
consumed adequate fruits (≥ 2 servings/day) (IPH, 2020). 
By age group, adults aged 18-19 years old (98.9%) were 
reported to have the highest prevalence of inadequate 
intake of vegetables and/or fruits (IPH, 2020). In terms of 
amount consumed, women consumed 1.59 servings of 
vegetables/day compared to 1.61 servings/day for men. 
Women consumed 1.40 servings of fruit/day compared to 
1.53 servings/day for men (IPH, 2014). Based on ethnicity, 
Chinese consumed more vegetables and fruits compared 
to other ethnic groups in the country (IPH, 2020). A small-
scale study among adults aged 20-65 years in Penang and 
Kota Bharu found that adults consumed 1.3 ± 1.0 servings 
of vegetables daily and 0.7 ± 1.0 servings of fruits daily 
(Lee & Wan Abdul Manan, 2019). These intakes were 
much lower than the recommended daily intake of 
vegetables and fruits. In Selangor, a study on 348 adults 
reported that only a small proportion of respondents (3%) 
consumed at least ﬁ ve servings of vegetables and fruits 
daily. They consumed 0.7 serving of vegetable and 1 
serving of fruit daily (Wong et al., 2014).  
 
Nurul Izzah et al. (2012) reported that among adults in 
Selangor, the most frequently consumed vegetables were 
spinach, Chinese mustard, cauliﬂ ower, celery, water 
spinach, French beans, long beans, potato, carrot, round 
cabbage, chilies, cucumber, tomato, and okra. The most 
consumed ulam and traditional vegetables were petai, 
sweet leaves (cekur manis) and Indian pennywort 
(pegaga). Shallots, onion, garlic, green bean sprout and 
curry leaves were also preferred by Malaysian adults. On 
the other hand, the most preferred fruits were apples and 
bananas. In terms of cooking method, Malays and 
Chinese consumed more boiled vegetables compared to 
Indians (Nurul Izzah et al., 2012). Attitude, habit, social 
inﬂuences from family members and friends, and 
99Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
availability of fruits at home and nearby areas were the 
factors found to be associated with the intention to 
consume vegetables and fruits among Malaysian adults 
(Khairunnisa Izzati et al., 2012). A qualitative study 
reported that texture, taste, colour, odour and appearance 
were the main factors inﬂ uencing the consumption of 
vegetables and fruits among Malay adults (Norsyahidah 
et al., 2013). 
 
In comparison, studies reported in the USA such as the 
Women’s Health Study (WHS) in Boston showed that 
mean intake of vegetables and fruits was 6.1 ± 3.6 
servings/day, of which 3.9 ± 2.6 servings/day were of 
vegetables and 2.2 ± 1.6 servings/day were of fruits (Wang 
et al., 2012).  The proportion of women who consumed ≥ 
5 servings/day of total vegetables and fruits was 31.6% 
(Wang et al., 2012). Another US study (n = 3,696, 778 
adults; mean age = 64.1 ± 10.2 years and 64.1% were 
female) found that daily consumption of ≥ 3 servings of 
vegetables and fruits was 29.2% (Heffron et al., 2017). In 
the United States, consumers of frozen vegetables and 
fruits consumed signiﬁ cantly more total vegetables and 
fruits than non-consumers despite both groups not 
meeting their recommended daily servings of vegetables 
and fruits. Consumers of frozen vegetables and fruits had 
signiﬁcantly higher intakes of dietary ﬁ bre, potassium, 
calcium and vitamin D and lower sodium intake (Storey & 
Anderson, 2018). American children and adults who 
consumed canned vegetables and fruits consumed more 
energy, and energy-adjusted dietary ﬁ bre, total sugar, 
choline, potassium, and less fat and saturated fat. Both 
child and adult consumers and non-consumers of canned 
vegetables and fruits had comparable energy adjusted 
sodium and added sugar intakes (Freedman & Fulgoni, 
2016). These ﬁndings on frozen and canned vegetables 
and fruits were derived from secondary analysis of cross-
sectional data from the U.S. National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Surveys. In the European Union, 65.7% of 
individuals aged ≥  15 years consumed at least one 
portion/day of vegetables and fruits; only 14.1% 
consumed > 5 servings/day (Eurostat, 2018). In Kenya, a 
national cross-sectional study carried out in 2015 (n = 
4,479 adults; aged 18-69 years) found that mean serving 
of vegetables and fruits was 2.09 serving/day, with 1.31 
servings/day of vegetables and 0.78 servings/day of fruits.  
Only 12.4% of adults in Kenya had ≥  2 servings/day of 
fruits, 7.4% had ≥ 3 servings/day of vegetables and 6.0% 
had ≥ 5 servings/day of vegetables and fruits (Pengpid & 
Peltzer, 2018). In Tanzania, a population-based survey 
found that 82% of the adults aged ≥15 years did not meet 
the daily recommended intake for vegetables and fruits 
(Msambichaka et al., 2018).  
 
In Asia, data from the 2013 China Chronic Disease 
Surveillance survey showed that 46.8% of Chinese adults 
did not meet the WHO recommendation of 400 g/day of 
vegetable and fruit intake, with mean vegetable intake at 
350.6 g/day and mean fruit intake at 102.3 g/day (Li et al., 
2017). Data from the 2015 Vietnam National Survey 
revealed that mean serving/day of vegetables and fruits 
was 4.3 servings, with 3.0 servings of vegetables and 1.3 
servings of fruits were recorded (Nguyen et al., 2020). 
Findings also showed that women consumed more fruits 
than men, but vegetable intake was similar in men and 
women. Less than half of the adults (42.9%) met the WHO 
recommendations for total consumption of vegetables 
and fruits, with more women met the recommendation as 
compared to men (Nguyen et al., 2020). In Laos, a national 
cross-sectional survey conducted in 2013 found that 
mean servings/day of vegetables and fruits was 2.32; with 
1.33 servings/day of vegetables and 0.99 servings/day of 
fruits among adults aged 18-64 years.  Only 8.7% of the 
adults had ≥ 3 servings/day of vegetables, 18.9% of the 
adults had ≥ 2 servings/day of fruits, and 5.3% had ≥  5 
servings/day of vegetables and fruits (Pengpid et al., 
2019). The Thailand National Health Examination Survey 
III demonstrated that mean servings of vegetables and 
fruits was 3.24 serving/day, with 1.78 servings/day of 
vegetables and 1.46 servings/day of fruits 
(Satheannoppakao et al., 2009). The Bangladesh Non-
communicable Disease Risk Factor Survey 2010 showed 
that the prevalence of inadequacy of vegetable and fruit 
intake (< 5 servings/day) was 82.8% (Karim et al., 2017). 
 
100 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
5.5 Key Recommendations 
Key Recommendation 1 
 
Eat at least ﬁve servings of vegetables and fruits everyday.  
 
How to Achieve  
 
1. Eat at least three servings of vegetables a day,
 and two servings of fruits a day. 
 
2. Eat at least one serving of vegetables at every main meal.  
 
3. Consume fruit as snack if you not consume it with your main meal. 
Key Recommendation 2 
 
Eat a variety of vegetables everyday. 
 
How to Achieve  
 
1.
Eat green leafy vegetables such as sawi 
and bayam and their edible stems 
everyday.  
 
2. Eat di fferent coloured vegetables at every 
main meal.  
 
3. Eat fruit vegetables such as brinjal 
(eggplant), tomato, peria and petola several 
times a week.  
 
4. Vegetable can be fresh green leafy 
vegetables, other fresh vegetables 
including various coloured vegetables, fruit 
vegetables, bean vegetables, ulam, canned 
and frozen vegetables. Drain and rinse 
canned vegetables to reduce salt. 
 
5. Choose a variety of vegetables as snacks 
such as cucumber slices, tomatoes and 
carrot sticks.  
 
6. Prepare vegetable juices such as cucumber 
juice without added sugar and seasonings.  
 
7. Eat under-utilise vegetables such as cekor, 
terung pipit, midin, and drumstick 
(moringa) leaves. 
Key Recommendation 3 
 
Eat a variety of fruits everyday. 
 
How to Achieve  
 
1. Eat di
fferent type of fruits daily, if possible.     
 
2. Choose a variety of fruits as snacks such as 
bananas and guava, without added sugar, 
salt or ﬂavourings.  
 
3. If you choose dried fruits, select 
unsweetened or unsalted varieties.  
 
4. If you choose canned fruits, serve without 
syrup.  
 
5. If you choose fruit juices (without added 
sugar), limit to once a day.  Fresh whole 
fruits are preferable over fruit juices.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
101Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
5.6 References 
Alissa EM & Ferns GA (2017). Dietary fruits and vegetables and cardiovascular diseases risk. Crit Rev Food Sci 
57(9):1950-1962.  
 
Armstrong B & Doll R (1975). Environmental factors and cancer incidence and mortality in different countries, 
with special reference to dietary practices. Int J Cancer 15(4):617-631. 
 
Aune D (2019). Plant foods, antioxidant biomarkers, and the risk of cardiovascular disease, cancer, and mortality: 
A review of the evidence. Adv Nutr 10:S404-S421. 
 
Aune D, Giovannucci E, Boffetta P, Fadnes LT, Keum N, Norat T, Greenwood DC, Riboli E, Vatten LJ & Tonstad 
S (2017).  Fruit and vegetable intake and the risk of cardiovascular disease, total cancer and all-cause 
mortality: A systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis of prospective studies. Int J Epidemiol 
46:1029-1056. 
 
Behera SS, Sheikha AFE, Hammami R & Kumar A (2020).  Traditionally fermented pickles: How the microbial 
diversity associated with their nutritional and health beneﬁts? J Funct Foods 70 (2020):103971.   
 
Bjelke E (1975). Dietary vitamin A and human lung cancer. Int J Cancer 15(4):561-565. 
 
Blekkenhorst L, Sim M, Bondonno CP, Bondonno NP, Ward NC, Prince RL, Devime A, Lewis JR & Hodgson JM 
(2018). Cardiovascular health beneﬁts of speciﬁc vegetable types: A narrative review. Nutrients 10:595.  
 
Block G, Patterson B & Subar A (1992). Fruit, vegetables, and cancer prevention: A review of the epidemiological 
evidence. Nutr Cancer 18(1):1-29. 
 
Borgi L, Muraki I, Satija A, Willett WC, Rimm EB & Forman JP (2016). Fruit and vegetable consumption and the 
incidence of hypertension in three prospective cohort studies. Hypertension 67(2):288-293. 
 
Bousquet J, Anto JM, Czarlewski W, Haahtela T, Fonseca SC, Iaccarino G, Blain H, Vidal A, Sheikh A, Akdis CA, 
Zuberbier T & ARIA group (2020). Cabbage and fermented vegetables: From death rate heterogeneity in 
countries to candidates for mitigation strategies of severe COVID-19. Allergy 00:1-16.  
  
Bradbury KE, Appleby BN & Key TJ (2014). Fruit, vegetable, and ﬁber intake in relation to cancer risk: Findings 
from the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC). Am J Clin Nutr 100(Suppl 
1):394S-398S. 
 
D’Elia L, Rossi G, Ippolito R, Cappuccio F & Strazzullo P (2012). Habitual salt intake and risk of gastric cancer: 
A meta-analysis of prospective studies. Clin Nutr 31:489-498. 
  
Dauchet L, Amouyel P & Dallongeville J (2005). Fruit and vegetable consumption and risk of stroke: A meta 
analysis of cohort studies. Neurology 65:1193-1197. 
 
Dauchet K, Amoyel P, Hercberg S & Dallongeville J (2006). Fruit and vegetable consumption and risk of coronary 
heart disease.  A meta-analysis of cohort studies. J Nutr 136:2588-2593.  
 
Department of Statistics Malaysia (2019). Press release. Statistics on causes of death, Malaysia, 2019.   (Accessed 
on 23 Nov 2020). 
 
Dreher ML (2018). Whole fruits and fruit ﬁber emerging health effects. Nutrients 10(12):1833. 
 
Eurostat (2018). Fruit and Vegetable Consumption Statistics.  (Accessed on 12 October 2020). 
 
Freedman MR & Fulgoni VL III (2016). Canned vegetable and fruit consumption is associated with changes in 
nutrient intake and higher diet quality in children and adults: National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey 2001-2010.  J Acad Nutr Diet 116:940-948.  
  
Gan Y, Tong X, Li L, Cao S, Yin X, Gao C, Herath C, Li W, Jin Z, Chen Y & Lu Z (2015). Consumption of fruit and 
vegetable and risk of coronary heart disease: A meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Int J Cardiol 
183:129-137.   
 
102 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
GBP 2017 Risk Factor Collaborators (2018). Global, regional, and national comparative risk assessment of 84 
behavioural, environmental and occupational, and metabolic risks or clusters of risks for 195 countries and 
territories, 1990-2017: A systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017.  Lancet 
392:1923-1994. 
 
Griep LMO, Gelejinse JM, Kronhout D, Ocke MC, & Verschuern WM (2010). Raw and processed fruit and 
vegetable consumption and 10-year coronary heart disease incidence in a population-based cohort study 
in the Netherlands. PLOS One 5:e13609. 
 
Hastert TA & White E (2016). Association between meeting the WCRF/AICR cancer prevention 
recommendations and colorectal cancer incidence: Results from the VITAL cohort. Cancer Causes 
Control 27:1347-1359.  
 
Hartley L, Igbinedion E, Holmes J, Flowers N, Thorogood M, Clarke A, Stranges S, Hooper L & Rees K (2013). 
Increased consumption of fruit and vegetables for the primary prevention of cardiovascular diseases. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD009874. 
 
He FJ, Nowson CA & MacGregor GA (2006). Fruit and vegetable consumption and stroke: Meta-analysis of 
cohort studies. Lancet 367(9507):320-326. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(06)68069-0  
 
He FJ, Nowson CA, Lucas M & MacGregor GA (2007). Increased consumption of fruit and vegetables is related 
to a reduced risk of coronary heart disease: Meta-analysis of cohort studies. J Hum Hypertens 21:717-
728. 
 
He J, Gu Y & Zhang S (2017). Consumption of fruits and vegetables and breast cancer survival: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Sci Rep 7:599. 
 
Heffron SP, Rockman CB, Adelman MA, Gianos E, Guo Y, Xu JF & Berger JS (2017). Greater frequency of fruit and 
vegetable consumption is associated with lower prevalence of peripheral artery disease. Arterioscler 
Thromb Vasc Biol 37(6):1234-1240. 
 
Hu D, Huang J, Wang Y, Zhang D & Qu Y (2014). Fruits and vegetables consumption and risk of stroke. Stroke 
45(6):1613-1619. 
 
Hunter KJ & Fletcher JM (2002).  The antioxidant activity and composition of fresh, frozen, jarred and canned 
vegetables.  Innov Food Scie Emerg 3(4):399-406.  
 
Imamura F, O’Connor L, Ye Z, Mursu J, Hayashino Y, Bhupathiraju SN & Forouhi NG (2015). Consumption of 
sugar sweetened beverages, artiﬁ cially sweetened beverages, and fruit juice and incidence of type 2 
diabetes: Systematic review, meta-analysis, and estimation of population attributable fraction.  BMJ 
351:h3576.  
 
IPH (2008). Third National Health and Morbidity Survey 2006 (NHMS III) 2006. Institute for Public Health, 
Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
IPH (2011). Methodology and general ﬁndings. Volume 1 National Health and Morbidity Survey 2011 (NHMS 
2011). Institute for Public Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur 
 
IPH (2014). National Health and Morbidity Survey 2014: Malaysian Adult. Vol. II: Survey Findings. National 
Institutes of Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
IPH (2015). National Health and Morbidity Survey 2015 (NHMS 2015). Vol. II: Non-Communicable Diseases, Risk 
Factors & Other Health Problems. National Institutes of Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala 
Lumpur. 
 
IPH (2020). National Health and Morbidity Survey 2019 (NHMS 2019). Vol. I: Non-Communicable Diseases: Risk 
Factors and Other Health Problems. National Institutes of Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Selangor. 
 
IACR (2020). The Global Cancer Observatory 2020, Malaysia. International Agency for Cancer Research. . 
(Accessed on 23 November 2020). 
 
103Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Islami F, Sauer AG, Miller KD, Siegel RL, Fedewa SA, Jacobs EJ, McCullough ML, Patel AV, Ma J, Soerjomataram 
I, Flanders WD, Brawley OW, Gapstur SM & Jemal A (2018). Proportion and number of cancer cases and 
deaths attributable to potentially modiﬁable risk factors in the United States. CA Cancer J Clin 68:31-54. 
 
Jahns L, Conrad Z, Johnson LAK, Whigham LD, Wu D, Claycombe-Larson KJ (2018). A diet high in carotenoid-
rich vegetables and fruits favorably impacts inﬂammation status by increasing plasma concentrations 
of IFN-2 and decreasing MIP-1 and TNF- in healthy individuals during a controlled feeding trial. Nutr 
Res 52:98-104.  
 
Jim HK, Lim SY, Lee JS, Park S, Shin A, Choi BY, Shimazu T, Inoue M, Tsugane S & Kim J (2010). Fresh and pickled 
vegetable consumption and gastric cancer in Japanese and Korean populations: A meta-analysis of 
observational studies. Cancer Sci 101(2):508-516.  
 
Karim MN, Zaman MM, Rahman MM, Chowdhury MAJ, Ahsan HAMN, Hassan MM, Karim SR, Hossain MZ & 
Billah B (2017). Sociodemographic determinants of low fruit and vegetable consumption among 
Bangladeshi adults: Results from WHO-STEPS Survey 2010. Asia Pac J Public Health 29(3):189-198. 
 
Khairunnisa Izzati O, Muhammad Shahrim AK, Roselina K, Noranizan A, Nurhasmaalialisa AH & Syuhailly O 
(2012). Factors inﬂ uencing fruits and vegetables consumption behaviour among adults in Malaysia. 
Journal of Agribusiness Marketing 5:29-46. 
 
Khan K, Jovanovski E, Ho HVT, Marques ACR, Zurbau A, Mejia SB, Sievenpiper JL & Vuksan V (2018). The effect 
of viscous soluble ﬁ ber on blood pressure: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 28(1):3-13. 
 
Kim EK, Ha AW, Choi EO & Ju SY (2016). Analysis of kimchi, vegetable and fruit consumption trends among 
Korean adults: Data from the Korea National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (1998-2012).  Nutr 
Res Pract 10(2):188-197.   
 
Kim J & Kim J. (2018). Association between fruit and vegetable consumption and risk of hypertension in middle-
aged and older Korean adults. J Acad Nutr Diet 118(8):1438-1449. 
 
Kim HJ, Noh JS & Song YO (2018). Beneﬁ cial effects of kimchi, a Korean fermented vegetable food, on 
pathophysiological factors related to atherosclerosis. J Med Food 00(0):1-9.  
  
Lamb MJE, Griffin SJ, Sharp SJ & Cooper AJM (2017). Fruit and vegetable intake and cardiovascular risk factors 
in people with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes. Eur J Clin Nutr 71:115-121.  
 
Larsson SC, Virtamo J & Wolk A (2013). Total and speciﬁc fruit and vegetable consumption and risk of stroke: A 
prospective study. Atherosclerosis 227:147-152. 
 
Lee YY & Wan Abdul Manan WM (2019). Dietary intakes and obesity of Malaysian adults. Nutr Res Pract 
13(2):159-168. 
 
Li B, Li F, Wang L & Zhang D (2016). Fruit and vegetables consumption and risk of hypertension: A meta-analysis. 
J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich) 18(5):468-476. 
 
Li L, Pegg RB, Eitenmiller RR, Chun JY & Kerrihard AL (2017). Selected nutrient analyses of fresh, fresh-stored, 
and frozen fruits and vegetables.  J Food Compost Anal 59(2017):8-17. 
 
Li YC, Jiang B, Zhang M, Huang ZJ, Deng Q, Zhou MG, Zhao ZP, Wang YF & Wang LM (2017). Vegetable and fruit 
consumption among Chinese adults and associated factors: A nationally representative study of 170,847 
adults. Biomed Environ Sci 30(12):863-874. 
 
Liu MW, Yu HJ, Yuan S, Song Y, Tang BW, Cao ZK, Yang XH, Towne SD Jr & He QQ (2018). Association between 
fruit and vegetable intake and the risk of hypertension among Chinese adults: A longitudinal study. Eur 
J Nutr 57:2639-2647. 
 
104 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Miller V, Yusuf S, Chow CK, Dehghan M, Corsi DJ, Lock K, Popkin B, Rangarajan S, Khatib R, Lear SA, Mony P, 
Kaur M, Mohan V, Vijayakumar K, Gupta R, Kruger A, Tsolekile L, Mohammadifard N, Rahman O, 
Rosengren A, Avezum A, Orlandini A, Ismail N, Lopez-Jaramillo P, Yusufali A, Karsidag K, Iqbal R, Chifamba 
J, Oakley SM, Ariffin F, Zatonska K, Poirier P, Li W, Bo J, Chen H, Liu X, Bai X, Koon T & Mente A (2016). 
Availability, affordability, and consumption of fruits and vegetables in 18 countries across income levels: 
Findings from the Prospective Urban Rural Epidemiology (PURE) study. Lancet Glob Health 4:e695-e703.  
 
Miller V, Mente, Dehghan M, Rangarajan S, Zhang X, Swaminathan S, Dagenais G, Gupta R, Mohan V, Lear S, 
Bangdiwala SI, Schutte AE, Wentzel-Viljoen E, Avezum A, Altuntas Y, Yusoff K, Ismail N, Peer N, Chifamba 
J, Diaz R, Rahman O, Mohammadifard N, Lana F, Zatonska K, Wielgosz A, Yusufali A, Iqbal R, Lopez-
Jaramillo P, Khatib R, Rosengren A, Kutty VR, Li W, Liu J, Liu, S, Yin L, Teo K, Anand S, Yusuf S & 
Prospective Urban Rural Epidemiology (PURE) study investigation (2017). Fruit, vegetable, and legume 
intake, and cardiovascular disease and deaths in 18 countries (PURE): A prospective cohort study.  Lancet 
390:2037-2049.  
  
Msambichaka B, Eze IC, Abdul R, Abdulla S, Klatser P, Tanner M, Kaushik R, Geubbels E & Probst-Hensch N 
(2018). Insufficient fruit and vegetable intake in a low- and middle-income setting: A population-based 
survey in semi-urban Tanzania. Nutrients 10(2):222. 
 
Nestel PJ (2019). Dietary fat and blood pressure. Curr Hypertens Rep 21(2):17. 
 
Nguyen SM, Tran HTT, Tran BQ, Van Hoang M, Truong BD, Nguyen LT, Tran PD, Lai TD, Van Tran T & Shu XO 
(2020). Compliance to dietary guidelines on fruit and vegetable intake and prevalence of hypertension 
among Vietnamese adults, 2015. Eur J Prev Cardiol 27(1):39-46. 
 
Norat T, Aune D, Chan D & Romaguera D (2014). Fruits and vegetables: Updating the epidemiologic evidence 
for the WCRF/AICR lifestyle recommendations for cancer prevention. Cancer Treat Res 159:35-50. doi: 
10.1007/978-3-642-38007-5_3. 
 
Norsyahidah I, Muhammad Shahrim AK, Roselina K, Noranizan MA & Nurhasmilaalisa AH (2013). Fruit and 
vegetable consumption behaviour: A qualitative study of Malay adults in Subang Jaya, Selangor. Journal 
of Agribusiness Marketing 6:52-67. 
 
Nurul Izzah A, Aminah A, Md Pauzi A, Lee YH, Wan Rozita WM & Siti Fatimah D (2012). Patterns of fruits and 
vegetable consumption among adults of different ethnics in Selangor, Malaysia. Int Food Res J 19(3):1095-
1107. 
 
Ozer C & Yildrim HK (2019).  Some special properties of fermented products with cabbage origin: Pickled 
cabbage, sauerkraut and kimchi. TURJAF 7(3):490-497.  
 
Pensczynski KJ, Herder C, Krupp D, Rienks J, Egert S, Wudy SA, Roden M, Remer T & Buyken AE (2019). 
Flavonoid intake from fruit and vegetables during adolescence is prospectively associated with a 
favourable risk factor proﬁle for type 2 diabetes in early adulthood. Eur J Nutr 58:1159-1172.   
 
Pengpid S & Peltzer K. (2018). The prevalence and social determinants of fruit and vegetable consumption 
among adults in Kenya: A cross-sectional national population-based survey, 2015. Pan Afr Med J 31:137. 
 
Pengpid S, Vonglokham M, Kounnavong S, Sychareun V & Peltzer K (2019). The prevalence and social 
determinants of fruit and vegetable consumption and its associations with noncommunicable diseases 
risk factors among adults in Laos. Asia Pac J Public Health 31(2):157-166. 
 
Poorolajal J, Moradi L, Mohammadi Y, Cheraghi Z & Gohari-Ensaf F (2020). Risk factors for stomach cancer: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis.  Epidemiol Health 42:e2020004   
 
Putriani N, Perdana J, Nugrahedi M & Nugrahedi PY (2020).  Effect of thermal processing on key phytochemical 
compounds in green leafy vegetables: A review. Food Rev Int. doi: 10.1080/87559129.2020.17458261}1} 
 
Ren JS, Kamangar F, Forman D & Islami F (2012). Pickled food and risk of gastric cancer – A systematic review 
and meta-analysis of English and Chinese literature. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 21(6):905-915.  
 
105Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Sahariah SA, Potdar RD, Gandhi M, Kehoe SH, Brown N, Sane H, Coakley PJ, Marley-Zagar E, Chopra H, 
Shivshankaran D, Cox VA, Jackson AA, Margetts BM & Fall CHD (2016). A daily snack containing leafy 
green vegetables, fruit, and milk before and during pregnancy prevents gestational diabetes in a 
randomized, controlled trial in Mumbai, India.  J Nutr 146 (Suppl):1453S-1460S.  
 
Satheannoppakao W, Aekplakorn W & Pradipasen M (2009). Fruit and vegetable consumption and its 
recommended intake associated with sociodemographic factors: Thailand National Health Examination 
Survey III. Public Health Nutr 12(11):2192-2198. 
 
Scheffers FR, Wijga AH, Verschuren WMM, van der Schouw YT, Sluijs I, Smit HA & Boer JMA (2020). Pure fruit 
juice and fruit consumption are not associated with incidence of type 2 diabetes after adjustment for 
overall dietary quality in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition – Netherlands 
(EPIC-NL) Study.  J Nutr 150:1470-1477. 
 
Schwingshackl C, Hoffmann G, Knüppel S, Iqbal K, Andriolo V, Bechthold A, Schlesinger S & Boeing H (2017). 
Food groups and risk of hypertension: A systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis of 
prospective studies. Adv Nutr 8(6):793-803. 
 
Steﬂer D, Malyutina S, Nikitin Y, Nikitenko T, Rodriguez-Artalejo F, Peasey A, Pikhart H, Sabia S, Bobak M. (2019). 
Fruit, vegetable intake and blood pressure trajectories in older age. J Hum Hypertens 33:671-678. 
 
Steinmetz KA, Potter JD (1991). Vegetables, fruit, and cancer. II. Mechanisms. Cancer Causes Control 2(6):427-
442.  
 
Storey M & Anderson P (2018). Total fruit and vegetable consumption increases among consumers of frozen fruit 
and vegetables.  Nutrition 46(2018):115-121.  
 
Sun B, Shi X, Wang T & Zhang D (2018). Exploration of the association between dietary ﬁ ber intake and 
hypertension among U.S. adults using 2017 American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Blood Pressure Guidelines: NHANES 2007-2014. Nutrients 10(8):1091. 
 
Turati F, Rossi M, Pelucchi C, Levi F & Vecchia CL (2015). Fruit and vegetables and cancer risk: A review of 
southern European studies. B J Nutr 113:S102-S110. 
 
Vieira AR, Abar L, Vingeliene S, Chan DSM, Aune D & Navarro-Rosenblatt D, Stevens C, Greenwood D & Norat 
T (2016). Fruits, vegetables and lung cancer risk: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Oncol 
27:81-96. 
 
Wang L, Manson JE, Gaziano JM, Buring JE & Sesso HD (2012). Fruit and vegetable intake and the risk of 
hypertension in middle-aged and older women. Am J Hypertens 25(2):180-189. 
  
Wang PY, Fang JC, Gao ZH, Zhang C & Xie SY (2016). Higher intake of fruits, vegetables or their ﬁber reduces 
the risk of type 2 diabetes: A meta-analysis.  J Diabetes Investig 7:56-69.  
 
Wang X, Ouyang Y, Liu J, Zhu M, Zhao G, Bao W & Hu FB (2014). Fruit and vegetable consumption and mortality 
from all causes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer: Systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis 
of prospective cohort studies. BMJ 349:g4490. doi: 10.1136/bmj.g4490  
 
Wong CY, Zalilah MS, Mirnalini K & Mohd Nasir MT (2014). Stages of change to increase fruit and vegetable 
intake and its relationships with fruit and vegetable intake and related psychosocial factors. Nutr Res 
Pract 8(3):297-303. 
 
WHO (2003). Diet, Nutrition and the Prevention of Chronic Diseases.  Report of a joint WHO/FAO Expert 
Consultation. WHO Technical Report Series 916. World Health Organization, Geneva.  
 
WHO (2017).  Cardiovascular Diseases (CVDs) Key Facts.    (Accessed on 23 Nov 2020).  
 
Wu L, Sun D & He Y (2016). Fruit and vegetables consumption and incident hypertension: Dose-response meta-
analysis of prospective cohort studies. J Hum Hypertens. 30(10):573-580. 
 
Wu Y, Zhang D, Jiang X & Jiang W (2015). Fruit and vegetable consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus: 
A dose-response meta-analyses of prospective cohort studies.  Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 25:140-147. 
  
106 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Yoo JY, Cho HJ, Moon S, Choi J, Lee S, Ahn C, Yoo KY, Kim I, Ko KP, Lee JE & Park SK (2020). Pickled vegetable 
and salted ﬁsh intake and the risk of gastric cancer: Two prospective cohort studies and a meta-analysis. 
Cancers 12:966. 
 
Zabetakis I, Lordan R, Norton C & Tsoupras A (2020).  COVID-19: The inﬂammation link and the role of nutrition 
in potential mitigation.  Nutrient 12(5):1466.  
 
Zhan J, Liu YJ, Cai LB, Xu FR, Xie T & He QQ (2017). Fruit and vegetable consumption and risk of cardiovascular 
disease: A meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Crit Rev Food Sci 57(8):1650-1663.  
 
Zhou X, Chen R, Zhong C, Wu J, Li X, Qian L, Cui W, Yi N, Xiao M, Yin H, Xiong G, Han W, Hao L, Yang X & Yang 
N (2019). Fresh fruit intake in pregnancy and the association with gestational diabetes mellitus: A 
prospective cohort study. Nutrition 60:129-135. 
 
Zhu F, Du B & Xu B (2018). Anti-inﬂ ammatory effects of phytochemicals from fruits, vegetables, and food 
legumes: A review. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 58(8):1260-1270. 
 
107Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
healthy food
KEY 
MESSAGE
6
Eat adequate amounts of rice, 
other cereals, whole grain 
cereal-based products and 
tubers
6.1 Terminology 
108 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Breads 
 
Breads refer to leavened or unleavened dough 
prepared from ﬂ our or meal,
 or a combination of 
these with water and baked or steamed. Among 
examples of breads are white or wholemeal bread, 
bun, pita bread, roti canai, roti arab, capati, tortilla, 
bagel and steamed bun or pau (MOH, 1985). 
 
Carbohydrate 
 
Carbohydrates are polyhydroxy aldehydes, 
ketones,
 alcohols, acids, their simple derivatives 
and their polymers having linkages of the acetal 
type (FAO/ WHO, 1998). 
 
One of the macronutrients and a source of energy. 
Carbohydrates are the least concentrated form of 
energy providing 4 kcal per gram (NHMRC, 2013). 
They include sugars, starches, and ﬁbre (USDHHS 
& USDA, 2015). 
 
 
 
 
 
Fibre  
 
Total ﬁbre is the sum of dietary ﬁbre and functional 
ﬁbre
. Dietary ﬁ bre consists of nondigestible 
carbohydrates and lignin that are intrinsic and 
intact in plants (i.e., the ﬁbre naturally occurring in 
foods). Functional ﬁ bre consists of isolated, 
nondigestible carbohydrates that have beneﬁ cial 
physiological effects in humans. Functional ﬁbres 
are either extracted from natural sources or are 
synthetically manufactured and added to foods, 
beverages and supplements (USDHHS & USDA, 
2015).  
 
Starches  
 
Many glucose units linked together into long 
chains. Examples of foods containing starch 
include vegetables (e.g
., potatoes, carrots), grains 
(e.g., brown rice, oats, wheat, barley, corn), and 
legumes (beans and peas; e.g., kidney beans, 
garbanzo beans, lentils, split peas)  
(USDHHS & USDA, 2015). 
 
 
 
66
KEY MESSAGE
EAT ADEQUATE AMOUNTS OF 
RICE, OTHER CEREALS, WHOLE 
GRAIN CEREAL-BASED 
PRODUCTS AND TUBERS
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Nik Shanita Safii, Assoc. Prof. Dr. Barakatun Nisak Mohd Yusof, Dr. Wong Jyh 
Eiin, Assoc. Prof. Dr. Wan Azdie Mohd Abu Bakar, Assoc. Prof. Dr. Sharifah Wajihah Wafa Syed 
Saadun Tarek Wafa and Mr. Khairul Hasnan Amali.
109Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Sugars  
 
Composed of one unit (monosaccharide,
 such as 
glucose or fructose) or two joined units 
(disaccharide, such as lactose or sucrose). Sugars 
include those occurring naturally in foods and 
beverages, those added to foods and beverages 
during processing and preparation, and those 
consumed separately (USDHHS & USDA, 2015). 
Other terminologies for sugars which include total 
sugars, free sugars, added sugars and hidden 
sugars can be found in Key Message 11.  
 
Cereals 
 
Cereals are the edible seeds known as kernel or 
grains of the grass family, 
Gramineae or Poaceae 
(Frølich & Aman, 2010). True cereal grains include 
wheat, oat, rice, corn, barley, rye, kamut, triticale, 
sorghum, fonio, millet, teff , and canary seed 
(AACCI, 2006). All cereal grains have three 
anatomical components: the bran, endosperm, and 
germ. Each component contributes to a different 
nutritional composition. Bran consists primarily of 
the main outer layers of the grain which is rich in 
dietary ﬁber, vitamins, minerals, and 
phytochemicals (Seal et al., 2016). The endosperm 
constitutes about 60-85% of the grain, comprised 
mainly of carbohydrates in the form of starches 
with some protein and B vitamins (Frølich & 
Aman, 2010). The germ is the smallest fraction 
(2.5-3%) of the grain, containing a high lipid and 
protein content and some vitamins and minerals 
(Mathews & Chu, 2020).   
 
Cereal-based products 
 
Cereal products mostly made from a variety of 
grains including rice,
 wheat, maize, oats, rye, 
barley, millet, quinoa, and sorghum derive either 
from the processing of grain through one or more 
mechanical or chemical operations, or from the 
processing of ﬂour, meal or starch (FAO, 1996). 
 
 
Dietary ﬁbre 
 
Dietary ﬁber is the edible parts of plants or 
analogous carbohydrates that are resistant to 
digestion and absorption in the human small 
intestine with complete or partial fermentation in 
the large intestine . Dietary 
ﬁber includes 
polysaccharides, oligosaccharides, lignin, and 
associated plant substances. Dietary ﬁ bers 
promote beneﬁcial physiological effects including 
laxation, and/ or blood cholesterol attenuation, 
and/ or blood glucose attenuation (AACC, 2001), 
 
Glycemic index (GI) 
 
A way to classify carbohydrate-containing foods 
based on the ability of diff erent types of 
carbohydrate-containing foods to raise the blood 
glucose level. GI is de
ﬁned as the incremental area 
under the blood glucose response curve elicited by 
a 50 g available carbohydrate portion of a food 
expressed as a percentage of the response to 50 g 
anhydrous glucose taken by an individual 
(Wolever, 2013). 
 
Glycemic load (GL) 
 
The GL refers to the cumulative exposure to 
postprandial glycemia, as a measure of insulin 
demand
, over a speciﬁed period of time (Salmeron 
et al., 1997). It does not take into account the 
pattern of loading within the speciﬁ ed time e.g., 
few high – glycemic impact meals versus frequent 
meals of low glycemic impact. It is calculated 
indirectly as the product of the average GI of 
carbohydrate foods consumed and the total 
carbohydrate intake over a speci ﬁed time period 
(Jenkins et al., 1981). 
 
Noodles and pasta 
 
Products such as mee, bihun,
 laksa, macaroni and 
spaghetti that are obtained by extruding or 
moulding units of dough made of cereal ﬂ our 
(MOH, 1985). 
110 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Rice  
 
Grains of Oryza sativa from which the husk has 
been removed. White rice are rice grains that have 
been milled and polished to remove the husk,
 bran 
and germ. Among different varieties of rice include 
brown, wild, basmati, parboiled and fragrant rice 
(MOH, 1985). 
  
Reﬁned Grains 
 
Reﬁned grains and grain products refer to highly 
processed grain (cereal) foods where the outer 
layer of the grain is lost during processing 
(NHMRC, 2013). Many re
ﬁned grains are low in 
ﬁber but enriched with thiamin, riboﬂavin, niacin, 
and iron, and fortiﬁed with folic acid (USDHHS & 
USDA, 2015). These also include cereal or grain-
based products with a signiﬁcant amount of added 
fat and sugar, such as cakes, pastries, and biscuits 
(NHMRC, 2013). 
 
Snacks  
 
A snack is composed of solid food with or without 
a beverage that occurs between habitual meal 
occasions for the individual,
 is not a substitute for 
a meal, and provides substantially fewer calories 
than would be consumed in a typical meal 
(Johnson & Anderson, 2010). 
 
Tubers  
 
Root plants that store carbohydrates. These 
include potatoes,
 sweet potatoes, tapioca 
(cassava), yam, lotus root, ginger root and sweet 
turnip (sengkuang) (MOH, 1985). 
 
Whole grain 
 
Whole grains consist of the intact, ground
, cracked 
or ﬂaked caryopsis, whose principal anatomical 
components are the starchy endosperm, germ, and 
bran, which are present in the same relative 
proportions as they exist in the intact caryopsis 
(AACCI, 1999; Jones, 2010). 
 
Whole grain products 
 
Food products made with at least one whole grain 
ingredient (AA
CC, 2000). The food contains 100% 
whole grain ingredients for wheat ﬂour, rice ﬂour, 
rice and grains; a minimum of 60% whole grain 
ingredients for bread; and a minimum of 25% or 8 
g per serving whole grain ingredients for other 
products (MOH, 2020). 
 
6.2 Introduction 
 
Cereals and cereal products are the basis of diets in many 
different cultures and cuisines in both developed and 
developing countries, providing a major proportion of 
dietary energy and nutrients (Laskowski et al., 2019). They 
are composed of approximately 75% carbohydrates, 
mainly starches and about 6-15% protein, contributing in 
global terms more than 50% of energy supply (WHO, 
2003).  
 
Among the types of cereals broadly consumed worldwide 
include wheat, maize, rice, barley, sorghum, oats, rye and 
millet. Cereals and cereal based products are the most 
consumed staple accounting for the highest food supply, 
providing a major source of energy in the form of 
carbohydrate and protein. In Malaysia, rice is the main 
cereal and staple consumed due to its cultural importance 
for all major ethnic groups, palatability and ease of 
preparation. Rice is easily available and accessible in the 
country as its production is subsidized and supply is 
assured by means of various policies. This is followed by 
wheat and wheat based products which include noodles, 
breads and pastas (Sundaram & Tan, 2019).  
 
Other than being an exceptional sources of energy and 
plant based protein, whole grain cereals have been 
acknowledged as an important source of ﬁbre, minerals, 
trace elements, vitamins, carotenoids, polyphenols and 
numerous bioactive compounds with antioxidant and 
anti-carcinogenic properties (Gani et al., 2012). These 
properties are all essentials to promote and maintain 
health. Research ﬁ ndings have shown that intake of 
whole grain cereals as potential protection against 
obesity, diabetes, CVD and cancers (McKeown et al., 
2013). 
 
 
6.3 Scientiﬁc basis 
 
6.3.1 Importance of carbohydrate in a diet  
 
The importance of carbohydrates in human nutrition 
cannot be underestimated. Dietary carbohydrate is the 
primary source of energy in the human diet (SACN
 et al., 
2015; NCCFN, 2017). Besides, intake of dietary 
carbohydrate from a variety of sources is beneﬁ cial. It 
provides various micronutrients and phytochemicals 
including ﬁbre which are necessary for optimal health 
(Chambers, Byrne & Frost, 2019). Also, an adequate 
amount of carbohydrate is required to maintain glucose 
homeostasis and gastrointestinal functions (Ludwig et al., 
2018). Therefore, eating an adequate amount of rice, other 
cereals, cereal-based products, and tubers help to achieve 
a sufficient amount of carbohydrates as dietary energy 
and nutrient adequacy. 
 
111Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
The optimal proportion of carbohydrate (including 
starches and sugars) is essential in reducing chronic 
disease risk (Chambers, Byrne & Frost, 2019). The 
estimated Acceptable Macronutrient Distribution Ranges 
(AMDR) related to reducing the risk of chronic disease for 
carbohydrate is 45-65% total energy intake (TEI) (IOM, 
2002). As for the Malaysian adult population, the 
Technical Scientiﬁ c Committee (TSC) of RNI 2017 
recommends the carbohydrate intakes of 50-65% TEI 
(NCCFN, 2017) with the optimal proportion should be 
between 50 and 55% TEI (Seidelman et al., 2018).  
 
Nonetheless, the Prospective Urban Rural Epidemiology 
(PURE) study observed that high carbohydrate intake of > 
60% of TEI was associated with an adverse impact on 
total mortality and non-cardiovascular disease mortality, 
with moderate consumption (e.g., 50-55%) were likely to 
be more appropriate than very high or very low 
carbohydrate intakes (Dehghan et al., 2017). The PURE 
study is a large prospective cohort involving 18 countries 
in ﬁve continents from low and middle-income countries, 
including Malaysia. The high carbohydrate intake, 
especially from reﬁ ned sources (such as white rice and 
white bread) may explain the increased risk of total 
mortality and cardiovascular events (Dehghan et al., 
2017). 
 
A similar ﬁnding was also observed in the recent meta-
analyses of prospective cohort study involving 15428 
adults in four communities who were enrolled in the 
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study 
(Seidelman et al., 2018). In this meta-analysis, both high 
and low proportions of carbohydrate diets were 
associated with increased mortality, with minimal risk 
observed at a 50-55% carbohydrate intake (Seidelman et 
al., 2018). The relationship between carbohydrate intake 
and the risk of mortality was non-linear. Both PURE and 
ARIC cohort studies suggested a U-shaped association, 
with the lowest observed risk associated with 
carbohydrate consumption of 50-55% of TEI (Figure 6.1) 
(Dehghan et al., 2017; Seidelman et al., 2018). The data 
also indicate that the source of carbohydrate, as well as 
the source of the protein and fat substituted for 
carbohydrates in the diet, might modify the relationship 
between carbohydrate intake and mortality (Seidelman et 
al., 2018). 
Figure 6.1: U-shaped association between the percentage of energy from carbohydrate and all-cause mortality in 
ARIC and PURE cohort studies 
Source: Seidelman et al. (2018) and Dehghan et al. (2017) 
Hazard ratio
Energy from carbohydrate (%)
ARIC 95%CI
PURE 95%CI
1.6
1.7
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0
0 2 03 04 05 06 07 0 80
112 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
6.3.2 Role of dietary ﬁbre in a diet  
 
Eating adequate amounts of rice,
 other cereals, cereal-
based products and tubers ensures that one obtains 
sufficient carbohydrate as dietary energy in the diet. 
Besides getting adequate carbohydrate in terms of 
quantity, it is equally important to choose quality 
carbohydrate choices. Dietary ﬁbre, whole grains, dietary 
glycaemic index (GI), glycaemic loads (GL), and total 
sugars are among common indicators of carbohydrate 
quality (Reynolds et al., 2019). 
 
Dietary ﬁbre are edible carbohydrate polymers with three 
or more monomeric units that are resistant to digestion 
and absorption in the human small intestines (Joint FAO, 
2010). These include edible carbohydrates naturally found 
in cereals, especially whole grains, tubers, fruits, 
vegetables and legumes. It is well documented that 
dietary ﬁbre, depending on its water solubility, viscosity 
and fermentability, may exert different beneﬁcial effects 
on the human body. These include fecal bulking eff ect, 
delaying post-prandial glucose and lipid metabolism and 
promoting healthy gut microbiota which is increasingly 
recognised to protect against non-communicable disease 
risks and mortality (Makki et al., 2018).   
 
As concluded in the recent series of systematic reviews 
and meta-analyses of prospective studies and clinical 
trials (Reynolds et al., 2019), a higher intake of dietary ﬁbre 
or whole grains are associated with a reduction in 
mortality risk and NCD incidences. For instance, higher 
intake of dietary ﬁ bre is associated with a 15-31% 
reduction in all-cause mortality, risks of coronary heart 
disease, stroke, type 2 diabetes and colon cancer. More 
importantly, there is a clear dose-response relationship 
between dietary ﬁbre and health outcomes. Consuming 
25-29 g dietary ﬁ bre per day confers greatest beneﬁ ts 
compared to lower consumption of dietary ﬁbre (15-19 g 
or 20-24 g). The ﬁ ndings also concluded that additional 
beneﬁts are likely to accrue with more than 30 g intake of 
dietary ﬁbre daily. 
 
 
Whole grains are useful means of increasing dietary ﬁbre 
intake. Many whole grains are good sources of dietary 
ﬁbre while most reﬁned grains contain little or no ﬁbre. It 
is therefore not surprising that similar reductions in all 
critical health outcomes (13-33%) were also observed for 
whole grain intakes in prospective studies and 
intervention trials (Reynolds et al., 2019). The reported 
beneﬁts of dietary ﬁbres were likely attributed to ﬁbre-rich 
foods such as wholegrains, fruits and vegetables, due to 
the fact that synthetic and extracted ﬁbre were not widely 
used when the contained studies were undertaken. 
Existing data suggest that dietary ﬁbre and whole grains 
are complementary in reducing disease risk in the 
population.  
 
Whole grain products are deﬁ ned by the quantity 
(percentage or speciﬁ c amount) of whole grain 
ingredients incorporated into a food. In Malaysia, a whole 
grain product should contain 100% whole grain 
ingredients for wheat ﬂour, rice ﬂour, rice and grains; at 
least 60% whole grain ingredients for bread; and 25% 
whole grain ingredients or 8 g per serving for other 
products (MOH, 2020). However, there is currently no 
universally accepted deﬁnition of whole grain and whole 
grain products that can be used to provide quantity 
recommendations for consumers (Van Der Kamp et al., 
2014; Seal et al., 2016; Mathew & Chu, 2020). 
 As a result, 
dietary guidelines for whole grain consumption of many 
countries remain non-quantitative (Herforth et al., 2019), 
e.g., enjoy grain (cereal) foods, mostly whole grain and/ or 
increase cereal ﬁ bre varieties (NHMRC, 2013), 
diversiﬁcation of the diet to provide increasing amounts of 
whole grains, pulses, fruits and vegetables is encouraged 
(SACN, 2015). Given the protective roles of whole grains 
and dietary ﬁ bre in disease risks, MDG 2020 focuses on 
increasing dietary ﬁbre and replacing reﬁned grains with 
whole grains. 
 
 
113Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
6.3.3 Glycaemic index and glycaemic load  
 
Glycaemic index (GI) and glycaemic load (GL) are two 
empirical metrics that rank carbohydrate-containing 
foods based on their physiological eff ects on blood 
glucose upon consumption. There are evidences from 
prospective cohort studies that diets lower in overall GI or 
GL are protective of coronary heart disease and type 2 
diabetes development (Livesey & Livesey,
 2019; Livesey 
et al., 2019), but their inﬂuence on body weight and CVD 
risks have been inconsistent in intervention trials (Vega-
Lopez, Venn & Slavin,  2018; Reynolds et al., 2019). 
Concurring with dietary guidelines of other countries 
(Buyken et al., 2018; Herforth et al., 2019), the current 
MDG 2020 does not have explicit recommendations 
based on GI or GL due to inclusive or insufficient evidence 
linking GI/ GL in disease risk reduction. Future studies 
are warranted to consider GI/ GL as a relevant measure of 
carbohydrate quality, along with dietary ﬁbre and whole 
grains when addressing the health aspects and impact of 
carbohydrate quality (Brand-Miller & Buyken, 2020).  
 
6.3.4 Limit intake of reﬁned carbohydrate 
 
Reﬁned carbohydrates are present in the form of reﬁned 
grains and reﬁned sugars. Diet that is high in processed 
foods, added sugars and other re
ﬁned carbohydrates are 
among the driving factors for the growing epidemics of 
many non-communicable diseases. Plain sugars are 
reﬁned forms of carbohydrate and generally refer to 
monosaccharides and disaccharides naturally present in 
foods or added to food products. The term ‘free sugar’ 
differs from ‘added sugar’, as it also includes naturally 
present sugars in fruit juices, syrups and honey (Buyken 
et al., 2018). A growing body of evidence suggests 
restricting the intake of free sugars in adults and children 
to reduce the risk of NCDs (WHO, 2015), principally via 
prevention and control of unhealthy weight gain and 
dental caries, which is explained in more details in Key 
Message 11. 
 
Compared to reﬁned grains, whole grain contains higher 
amounts of magnesium, dietary ﬁber, phytochemicals and 
other functional compounds (Benisi-Kohansai et al., 2016). 
It is clear that increased intake of whole grain by only 2-
3 servings per day may reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes, 
cardiovascular disease and all-cause mortality, hence the 
recommendation of balancing the whole and reﬁ ned 
grains would require increasing the whole-grain intake 
and simultaneously reducing reﬁ ned grains intake 
(Gaesser, 2019).  
 
 
 
 
 
Several prospective cohort studies have identiﬁed whole 
grain food sources association with lowered risk of CVD. 
Findings from large, population-based, prospective 
studies and clinical trials have consistently observed a 
dose-response relation between whole-grain intake and 
disease risk, with health beneﬁ ts proportional to the 
amount of whole grain consumed (Ye et al., 2012; Benisi-
Kohansai et al., 2016; Reynolds et al., 2019). Whole grain 
exert health beneﬁ ts by supporting the maintenance of 
glucose and insulin homeostasis, lowering of serum 
cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol concentrations and 
reducing inﬂ ammation and oxidative stress (Ye et al., 
2012). 
 
 
6.4 Current status 
 
FAO food balance data showed that carbohydrate foods 
supplied approximately 63% of the total per capita energy 
supply (Shahar et al., 2018). The trend in total rice supply 
reﬂects the trend in cereals, as rice is the main contributor 
and the food for the Malaysian population. Rice supply 
gradually decreased from 763 kcal/capita/day in 2013 to 
680 kcal/capita/day in 2014 whereas in 2017 this value 
has increased to 748 kcal/capita/day (FAOSTAT, 2017). On 
the other hand, wheat, maize, barley, oats, cereals and 
other per capita consumption steadily increased from 
2014 onwards (FAOSTAT, 2017).  
 
In Malaysian Adult Nutrition Survey 2014 (MANS, 2014), 
the mean carbohydrate intakes was 273 g/day, 
contributing to 53% of total energy intake. In comparison 
to MANS (2003) study, the daily intake of carbohydrates 
has decreased slightly over the years but the proportions 
of energy derived from carbohydrate is still within the 
recommendations (NCCFN, 2017). The majority of 
Malaysians achieved adequate daily energy contribution 
from carbohydrates (Zainuddin et al., 2019). However, it 
should be noted that carbohydrates were consumed 
mostly in reﬁ ned forms such as white rice and biscuits 
(Kasim et al., 2018). Despite the lack of national data on 
whole grains and whole grain products consumption 
among adults, it appears that whole grains are consumed 
infrequently in Malaysian diets. Local data of school 
children observed that only 25% of primary school 
children and 19% of adolescents consumed whole grains 
daily. The children and adolescents consumed wheat 
(77.7%) followed by oats (13.7%), corn/maize (7.4%) and 
rice (1.2%) as their main types of whole grains. Ready-to-
eat breakfast cereals and hot cereals were the two major 
food sources contributing to total whole grain intake. 
Almost all the children and adolescents (97.7 %) did not 
meet the Malaysian recommendation for whole grain 
intake of 2–4 servings per day (Norimah et al., 2015). 
 
 
114 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
6.5 Key Recommendations   
 
Key Recommendation 1 
 
Eat 3-5 servings of cereals, cereal-based products and tubers daily according to your energy needs and physical 
activity level
. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. Include at least one serving of cereal grains in every main meal
. 
 
2. Include a serving of snack food (light meal in between breakfast, lunch or dinner) based on tuber, 
wholegrain cereals or products if your energy need is more than 1500 kcal/day. 
 
      
Key Recommendation 2 
 
Choose at least half of your cereals and cereal-based products from whole grains. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. Cook white rice mixed with whole grains such as brown rice
, hulled barley, oats and corn. 
 
2. Choose whole grain alternatives for noodles and pasta, bread, breakfast cereals, cakes, biscuits and other 
cereal based products. 
 
3. Add whole grains such as corn, hulled barley and oats to soups (e.g., mushroom soup or beef stew). 
 
4. Choose whole-meal bread, whole-wheat capati, putu mayam ragi (string hoppers), ragi noodles, thosai 
or porridges over similar reﬁned products. 
 
5. Read the ingredients list of cereal-based product labels. Choose products with higher percentages of 
whole grains (refer KM14). 
 
 
Key Recommendation 3 
 
Choose cereal-based products that are high in ﬁbre,
 low in fat, sugar and salt. 
 
How to Achieve  
 
1. Read the nutrition information panel and look for the 
ﬁbre content, as well as look for claims of ‘high in 
ﬁbre’ on the label.   
 
2. Choose cereal based products labelled as high ﬁbre and low in fat, sugar and salt content. 
 
115Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
6.6 References  
 
AACC (American Association of Cereal Chemists) (2000). Whole grain deﬁnition. Cereal Foods World 45:79. 
 
AACC (American Association of Cereal Chemists) (2001). Report of the dietary ﬁber deﬁnition committee to the 
Board of Directors of the American Association of Cereal Chemists. Cereal Foods World 46(3):112-126. 
 
AACCI (American Association of Cereal Chemists International) (1999). Whole grain de ﬁnition. Cereal Foods 
World 45:79. 
 
AACCI (American Association of Cereal Chemists International) (2006). Cereals & Grains Association Submits 
Comments to FDA regarding Whole Grains Label Statements [Letter]. . (Accessed on 3 October 2020). 
 
Benisi-Kohansai S, Saneei P, Salehi-Marzijarani M, Larijani B & Esmaillzadeh A (2016). Whole-grain intake and 
mortality from all causes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer: A systematic review and dose-response 
meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Adv in Nutr 7:1052-1065. 
 
Brand-Miller J & Buyken AE (2020). The relationship between glycemic index & health. Nutrients 12:536-539. 
 
Buyken AE, Mela DJ, Dussort P, Johnson IT, Macdonald IA, Stowell JD & Brouns F (2018). Dietary carbohydrates: 
A review of international recommendations and the methods used to derive them. Eur J Clin Nutr 
72(12):1625-1643.  
 
Chambers ES, Byrne CS & Frost G (2019). Carbohydrate and human health: Is it all about quality? Lancet 
393(10170):384-386. 
 
Dehghan M, Mente A, Zhang X, Swaminathan S, Li W, Mohan V, Iqbal R, Kumar R, Wentzel-Viljoen E, Rosengren 
A & Amma LI (2017). Associations of fats and carbohydrate intake with cardiovascular disease and 
mortality in 18 countries from ﬁ ve continents (PURE): A prospective cohort study. Lancet 
390(10107):2050-2062. 
 
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization) (1996). Draft De ﬁnition and Classiﬁ cation of Commodities, W2979 
[online]. . (Accessed 1 September 2020). 
 
FAO/ WHO Expert Consultation (1998). Carbohydrate in Human Nutrition. Report of joint FAO/ WHO Expert 
Consultation paper 66. FAO Food and Nutrition, Rome. 
 
FAOSTAT (2017). Food Balance Sheets Malaysia.  (Accessed on 3 October 2020). 
 
Frølich W & Aman P (2010). Whole grain for whom and why? Food and Nutr Res 54:5056. 
 
Gaesser GA (2019). Perspective: Reﬁned grains and health: Genuine risk, or guilt by association? Adv in Nutr 
10:361-371. 
 
Gani A, Wani SM, Masoodi FA & Hameed G (2012). Whole-grain cereal bioactive compounds and their health 
beneﬁts: A review. J Food Process Technol 3:1-10. 
 
Herforth A, Arimond M, Álvarez-Sánchez C, Coates J, Christianson K & Muehlhoff E (2019). A global review of 
food-based dietary guidelines. Adv Nutr 10:590-605. 
. 
IOM (Institute of Medicine) (2002). Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrates, Fiber, Fat, Protein and 
Amino Acids (Macronutrients). Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine. National Academy Press, 
Washington D.C. 
 
Jenkins DJA, Wolever TMS, Taylor RH,  H,  H,  JM,  AC,  HC,  AL &  DV (1981). Glycemic index of foods: A 
physiological basis for carbohydrate exchange. Am J Clin Nutr 34:362-366. 
 
Johnson GH & Anderson GH (2010). Snacking deﬁnitions: Impact on interpretation of the literature and dietary 
recommendations. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 50(9):848-871.  
 
Joint FAO (2010). CODEX Alimentarius (CODEX) Guidelines on Nutrition Labeling CAC/GL 2–1985 as Last 
Amended 2010. WHO Food Standards Programme, Secretariat of the CODEX Alimentarius Commission, 
FAO, Rome.  
116 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Jones JM (2010). Regulatory aspects of whole grain and whole grain foods: De ﬁnitions and labeling. Cereal 
Chem 87:150-154.  
 
Kasim NBM, Ahmad MHB, Shaharudin ABB, Naidu BM, Ying CY & Aris TB (2018). Food choices among Malaysian 
adults: Findings from Malaysian Adults Nutrition Survey (MANS) 2003 and MANS 2014. Mal J Nutr 
24(1):63-75. 
 
Laskowski W, Górska-Warsewicz H, Rejman K,  Czeczotko M,  Zwolińska J (2019). How important are cereals 
and cereal products in the average Polish diet? Nutrients 11(3):679-700. 
 
Livesey G & Livesey H (2019). Coronary heart disease and dietary carbohydrate, glycemic index, and glycemic 
load: Dose-response meta-analyses of prospective cohort studies. Mayo Clinic Proc: Innovations, Quality 
and Outcomes 3(1):52-69.  
 
Livesey G, Taylor R, Livesey HF, Buyken AE, Jenkins DJ, Augustin LS, Sievenpiper JL, Barclay AW, Liu S, Wolever 
T & Willett WC (2019). Dietary glycemic index and load and the risk of type 2 diabetes: Assessment of 
causal relations. Nutrients 11(6):1436-1470. 
 
Ludwig DS, Hu FB, Tappy L & Brand-Miller J (2018). Dietary carbohydrates: Role of quality and quantity in 
chronic disease. BMJ 361:k2340. 
 
Makki K, Deehan EC, Walter J & Backhed F (2018). The impact of dietary ﬁbre on gut microbiota in host health 
and disease. Cell Host Microbe 23(6):705-715.  
 
MANS (2003). A report of Malaysian Adults Nutrition Survey. Ministry of Health, Putrajaya. 
 
MANS (2014). A report of Malaysian Adults Nutrition Survey. Ministry of Health, Putrajaya. 
 
Mathews R & Chu Y (2020). Global review of whole grain deﬁnitions and health claims. Nutr Rev 78(1):98-106. 
 
McKeown NM, Jacques PF, Seal CJ, de Vries J, Jonnalagadda SS, Clemens R, Webb D, Murphy LA, van Klinken 
JW, Topping D, Murray R, Degeneffe D & Marquart LF (2013). Whole grains and health: From theory to 
practice—highlights of The Grains for Health Foundation’s Whole Grains Summit 2012. J Nutr 
143(5):744S-758S. 
 
NHMRC (National Health and Medical Research Council) (2013). Australian dietary guidelines. National Health 
and Medical Research Council, Canberra. 
 
MOH (1985). Malaysian Food Act 1983 and Food Regulation 1985. Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
 
MOH (2020). Malaysia Food Act 1983 and Food Regulation 1985. Food (Amendment) (No. 4) Regulations 2020, 
Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
 
NCCFN (National Coordinating Committee on Food and Nutrition) (2017). A Report of the Technical Working 
Group on Nutritional Group on Nutritional Guidelines. Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
 
Norimah AK, Koo HC, Hamid Jan JM, Mohd Nasir MT, Tan SY, Appukutty M, Nurliyana R, Thielecke F, Hopkins 
S, Ong MK, Ning C & Tee ES (2015). Whole grain intakes in the diets of Malaysian children and 
adolescents – Findings from the MyBreakfast Study. PLOS One 10(11):e0142763. 
 
Reynolds A, Mann J, Cummings J, Winter N, Mete E & Te Morenga L (2019). Carbohydrate quality and human 
health: A series of systematic reviews and meta-analyses. Lancet 393(10170):434-445.  
 
Salmeron J, Manson JE, Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, Wing AL & Willett WC (1997). Dietary ﬁber, glycemic load, and 
risk of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus in women. JAMA. 277:472-477. 
 
Scientiﬁc Advisory Committee on Nutrition (SACN) (2015). Carbohydrates and health.  London: The Stationery 
Office.  uploads/attachment_data/ﬁle/445503/SACN_Carbohydrates_and_Health.pdf. (Accessed on 10 
Aug 2019). 
 
Seal CJ, Nugent AP, Tee ES & Thielecke F (2016). Whole-grain dietary recommendations: The need for a uniﬁed 
global approach. Br J Nutr 115:2031-2038. 
 
117Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Seidelmann SB, Claggett B, Cheng S, Henglin M, Shah A, Steffen LM, Folsom AR, Rimm EB, Willett WC & Solomon 
SD (2018). Dietary carbohydrate intake and mortality: A prospective cohort study and meta-analysis.  
Lancet Public Health 3(9):e419-e428. 
 
Shahar S, Mohamed HJ, Reyes FN & Amarra MS (2018). Adherence of Malaysian adults’ energy and 
macronutrient intakes to national recommendations: A review and meta-analysis. Nutrients 10(11):1584-
1611. 
 
Sundaram JK & Tan ZG (2019). Achieving Food Security for all Malaysians. Khazanah Research Institute, Kuala 
Lumpur. 
 
US Department of Health and Human Services and US Department of Agriculture (2015). 2015–2020 Dietary 
Guidelines for Americans. 8th ed.  (Accessed on 10 July 2020). 
 
Van Der Kamp JW, Poutanen K, Seal CJ & Richardson DP (2014). The HEALTHGRAIN deﬁnition of “whole grain”. 
Food Nutr Res 58:1. doi: 10.3402/fnr.v58.22100. 
 
Vega-Lopez S, Venn BJ & Slavin JL (2018). Relevance of the glycemic index and glycemic load for body weight, 
diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. Nutrients 10(10):1361-1388. 
 
Wolever TMS (2013). Is glycaemic index (GI) a valid measure of carbohydrate quality? Eur J Clin Nutr 67(5):522-
531. 
 
WHO (World Health Organization) (2015). Guideline: Sugars intake for adults and children. World Health 
Organization, Geneva.  
 
WHO (World Health Organization) (2003). Diet, Nutrition and the Prevention of Chronic Diseases. WHO, Geneva, 
Switzerland. 
 
Ye EQ, Chacko, SA, Chou EL, Kugizaki M & Liu S (2012). Greater whole grain intake is associated with lower risk 
of type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and weight gain. J Nutr 142:1304-1313.  
 
Zainuddin AA, Nor NM, Yusof SM, Irawati A, Ibrahim N, Aris T & Huat FL (2019). Changes in energy and nutrient 
intakes among Malaysian adults: Findings from the Malaysian Adult Nutrition Survey (MANS) 2003 and 
2014. Mal J Nutr 25(2):273-285. 
 
118 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
119Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
healthy food
KEY 
MESSAGE
7
Consume moderate amounts 
of fish, meat, poultry, egg, 
legumes and nuts
7.1 Terminology 
Egg 
 
Egg usually refers to chicken egg but can also 
include eggs from other birds, for instance duck 
and quail
. 
 
Fish 
  
Fish is any aquatic vertebrate animal that is 
covered with scales, and equipped with two sets 
of paired 
ﬁns and several unpaired ﬁns. The term 
includes all marine and fresh water ﬁshes. It does 
not include shellﬁsh.  
 
Legumes 
 
Legumes are plants that belong to the family of 
Leguminosae or known as Fabaceae
, which 
include pulses and lentils. They are in the form of 
fruit or seeds of a plant, which are grow within a 
pod. Groundnuts or peanuts, and monkey nuts are 
classiﬁed under legumes although being called as 
nuts. Common type of legumes consumed are 
baked beans, kidney beans, soya beans, pinto 
beans, black-eyed peas or garden peas, and 
different color of lentils. 
Meat 
 
Meat is deﬁned as skeletal muscle and associated 
tissues derived from commonly farmed and/ or 
harvested mammals. It includes part of all the 
carcass muscle component of animals such as 
cattle,
 sheep, goat, buffalo, deer, pig or rabbit. Meat 
ranges from raw fresh cuts to those made using 
advanced processing methods. However, it does 
not include organs and glands such as liver, 
kidney, brain and heart. 
 
Nuts 
 
Nuts are obtained from seeds or fruits of some 
plants. Chestnuts and hazelnuts are nuts obtained 
from fruits that have a hard shell. 
Where else 
almonds, cashew nuts, walnuts, pistachios, pecans 
and Brazil nuts are dried seeds. It is important to 
note that not all seeds are nuts but all nuts are 
seeds. In botanical term, nuts are referred as fruits 
that composed of inedible hard shell and seed that 
are generally edible, which explained why many 
nuts used in cooking such as almonds, pecans, 
walnuts are not classiﬁ ed as nuts in botanical 
term.   
120 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
77
KEY MESSAGE
CONSUME MODERATE 
AMOUNTS OF FISH, MEAT, 
POULTRY, EGG, LEGUMES AND 
NUTS
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Cheah Whye Lian, Assoc. Prof. Dr. Chin Yit Siew, Assoc. Prof. Dr. Geeta 
Appanah, Dr Megan Chong Hueh Zan, Ms. Siti Adibah Abdul Halim
121Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Poultry 
 
Poultry is deﬁned as domestic fowls which 
include chicken, duck,
 goose, turkey, quail and 
other avian foods raised for production of meat. It 
excludes egg. 
 
Processed meat 
 
Processed meat refers to meat that has been 
transformed through salting,
 curing, fermentation, 
smoking or other processes to enhance ﬂavor or 
improve preservation. 
 
Shellﬁsh 
 
Shellﬁsh, any aquatic invertebrate animal having 
a shell and belonging to the phylum Mollusca (i
.e., 
oysters, mussels, scallops and clams), the class 
Crustacea (i.e., shrimp, prawn, crab and lobster) or 
the phylum Echinodermata (i.e., sea urchins and 
sea cucumber). 
 
 
7.2 Introduction 
 
Protein is needed in the forming of new cells and repairing 
of old cells in our body, as part of growth and 
maintenance of human body. In addition, it also forms 
enzymes and hormones and provides energy. In situation 
where supply of energy from carbohydrate and fats is 
insufficient, protein will be used. Protein can be obtained 
from animal and plant sources. However, lysine, 
methionine, cystine, threonine, tryptophan and leucine are 
not synthesized by human body, therefore they have to 
be consumed through food. Methionine and lysine are 
needed for the endogenous synthesis of carnitine that 
plays a crucial role in energy production (Krajcovicova-
Kudlackova et al., 2000). Tryptophan is involved in the 
production of the neurotransmitter serotonin. 
 
A protein that provides all essential amino acids and 
some non-essential amino acids is considered as 
complete protein. Samples of complete protein are meat, 
poultry, ﬁsh, and eggs. Plant protein on the other hand is 
often classiﬁed as incomplete protein, with exception of 
soy protein. However, if plant protein is consumed 
appropriately, it can meet the energy needs. Sources of 
plant proteins are legumes, pulses, seeds, nuts, beans and 
soy products. 
 
For adults, to achieve optimal health, Malaysian 
Recommended Nutrient Intake RNI 2017 (NCCFN, 2017) 
has recommended at 1.00 g protein/kg body weight.  This 
amount was higher than previous recommendation of 
0.83 g/kg body weight/day by WHO (2007) because it was 
broadly agreed that the previous recommendation may 
be suffi cient for prevention of deﬁ ciency but not for 
optimal health.    
 
 
 
 
7.3 Scientiﬁc basis 
Fish (including shellﬁ sh), meat, poultry, eggs, legumes, 
and nuts are rich in protein and good source of nutrients 
such as iron, zinc, iodine, omega-3 fatty acids and 
vitamins (B-group vitamins). All these are important to 
maintain good health and functioning of the body. 
 
 
7.3.1 Fish 
 
Fish is a good source of high-quality proteins. Fish 
proteins are notable for its unique amino acids proﬁle and 
high biological value (Weichselbaum 
et al., 2013). Fish is 
also a leaner choice of animal protein, having the least 
saturated fat than meat and poultry (FAO & WHO, 2010). 
Additionally, ﬁsh also provides other micronutrients 
including iodine, iron, zinc, magnesium, selenium, 
potassium, and Bvitamins (Fernandes et al., 2012; 
Nurnadia et al., 2013; Tørris, Smastuen & Molin, 2018). 
 
Some ﬁsh (such as salmon, trout, and herring) are high in 
a type of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) called 
“omega-3 fatty acids” or n-3 fatty acids (Calder, 2014). 
These fatty acids are critical for brain development and 
prevention of allergies in children (Bernstein, Osken & 
Ferranti, 2019). Omega-3 fatty acids from ﬁsh have been 
shown to provide speciﬁ c health beneﬁ ts, notably in 
relation to cardiovascular health (Chowdhury et al., 2012; 
Endo & Arita, 2016, Del Gobbo et al., 2016; Alexander et 
al., 2017) as well as supportive roles in cognition and brain 
ageing (Raji et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2016) ).  
 
Small ﬁsh consumed with edible bones such as anchovies 
(ikan bilis) are good sources of calcium (Henry et al., 
2016). These can help to contribute to dietary calcium 
intake, especially for individuals who do not consume 
milk. 
 
 
7.3.2 Shellﬁsh 
 
Shellﬁsh such as clams, crabs,
 lobsters, mussels, oysters, 
scallops and shrimps are generally low in calories and rich 
in lean protein, healthy fats and many micronutrients 
(Table 7.1). Most number of shellﬁ sh contains omega-3 
fatty acids and therefore offer a range of health beneﬁts 
including those brain and heart health (Mozaffarian & Wu, 
2011). The omega-3 fatty acids found in seafood are 
derived from phytoplankton, the small aquatic plant cells 
that are a source of food for many aquatic organisms 
(USDA, 2018). Shellﬁsh are also rich in iron, magnesium 
and vitamin B 12 – all of which have essential 
contributions in the body (USDA, 2018).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
122 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Table 7.1: Nutrition comparison of 85 gram servings of different types of shellfish 
Shellfish Calories (kcal) Protein (grams) Fat (grams)
Shrimp 72 17 0.43 
Crayfish 65 14 0.81 
Crab 74 15 0.92 
Lobster 64 14 0.64 
Clams 73 12 0.82 
Scallops 59 10 0.42 
Oysters 69 8 2.00 
Mussels 73 10 1.90 
Source: USDA (2018) 
Shellﬁsh are most nutritious when steamed, grilled or 
baked. Breaded or deep fried shellﬁsh may contain extra 
calories, reﬁ ned carbohydrates, added salt and other 
preservatives. Shellﬁ sh may contain heavy metals such 
as mercury and cadmium, however, it is generally lower 
compared to larger ﬁshes.  
 
 
7.3.3 Lean meat and poultry 
 
Meats and poultry are valuable source of dietary protein 
and are considered as complete protein containing all 
essential amino acids,  which play important role in 
growth and development. 
The bioavailability of its 
minerals and vitamins, such as vitamin B 12, iron, iodine, 
and zinc are high as well (FAO, 2019). Meats and poultry 
vary in its’ fat content, and providing little amount of 
carbohydrates. Lean meat and poultry does not include 
offal such as liver and kidneys, heart, gizzard and visceral 
organs. 
 
Lean meat refers to the 100 g of meat that contains less 
than 10 g of fat, 4.5 g or less of saturated fats, and less 
than 95 mg of cholesterol (USDHHS & USDA, 2015). Based 
on FAO (2015), the lean cuts of the meat generally have a 
higher composition of water which is more than 70% per 
100 g, followed by the protein and lastly the fat 
composition. Examples of lean meat and lean poultry 
include skinless chicken breast, beef or pork tenderloin, 
and skinless turkey breast. Lean meats and lean poultry 
may provide important nutrients that body needs when 
consumed in recommended amounts in healthy eating 
patterns (USDHHS & USDA, 2015). Studies reveals that 
consumption of a heart-healthy diet that includes lean red 
meat has no detrimental effects on blood lipids and has 
shown to reduce major CVD risk factors (McNeill, 2014). 
 
When considering the health outcomes, meat can be 
further categorized into either red or white meat. The 
classiﬁcation of the red and white meats are based on 
their myoglobin or heme iron concentration, muscle ﬁber 
physiology, lipid proﬁ le, fatty acid composition, and 
cholesterol content (Cobos & Diaz, 2015; Keeton & 
Dikeman, 2017). Some physiological changes in meat 
color and texture are in response to an animal’s genetic, 
dietary regimen and/ or handling practices prior to 
slaughter that can alter the muscle pH endpoint and 
result in pale, soft, exudative or dark, ﬁ rm, dry muscle 
(Keeton & Dikeman, 2017). Red meat normally refers to 
beef, lamb, and pork based on properties such as red color 
before cook, dark color after cook, high myoglobin 
content, high lipid, protein and iron content; while white 
meat with a higher proportion of white muscle ﬁber has 
lighter colored meat, such as poultry and ﬁsh (Seman et 
al., 2018). A meta-analysis reported that consumption of 
unprocessed “red” meat (beef, lamb, or pork) was not 
associated with risk of all-cause mortality (Wang et al., 
2016). 
123Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
7.3.4 Processed meat 
 
Processed meat refers to meat that has been transformed 
through salting,
 curing, fermentation, smoking or other 
processes to enhance ﬂ avor or improve preservation 
(IARC, 2015). It also may contain preservatives. Processed 
meat include bacon, chicken or ﬁ sh nugget, red meat 
sausage, poultry sausage, luncheon meats (red and white 
meat), cold cuts (red and white meat), ham, regular hot 
dogs and low fat hot dogs made from poultry.  
 
Preservatives are used in processed meats for food safety, 
shelf life and food technology reasons. Sodium nitrite or 
potassium nitrite play a key role in the safety of processed 
meats. Nitrites, or in slow cured meats sodium or 
potassium nitrates which are gradually converted to 
nitrites, are the key ingredients in meat cures. They 
provide excellent protection against botulism in 
processed meats. At the same time their use results in the 
characteristic colour and ﬂ avour of cured meats. Other 
preservatives inhibit the growth of microorganisms. The 
sulphites, sources of sulphur dioxide, also inhibit the 
growth of microorganisms while retaining the bloom 
(fresh colour and appearance) of red meat (NSWFA, 2009) 
 
However, the processed meats and processed poultry are 
normally contained high salts, fats and carcinogenic 
compounds such as nitrosamines and nitrate (WCRF/ 
AICR, 2018).  Some of these preservatives can have 
adverse eff ects on health. The levels of nitrates and 
nitrites in meat are restricted because they can be 
converted in the stomach or during high temperature 
frying to chemicals understood to cause cancer. Sulphur 
dioxide exposure causes breathing diffi culties in some 
people. Other preservatives can have adverse eff ects if 
consumption limits are exceeded.  
 
Processed meat has been linked to coronary heart 
disease. Reports from systematic review and meta-
analysis had concluded that consumption of processed 
meats has strong association with higher incidence of 
coronary heart disease (Micha et al., 2013)  
 
 
7.3.5 Eggs 
 
Egg is an important source of protein and relatively less 
expensive compared to other animal-derived protein. An 
average large egg (50-60 g) contains about 6 grams of 
protein,
 slightly lower protein content than meat. Quality 
of egg protein is however excellent. Egg protein is 
considered complete as it contains all nine essential 
amino acids required by the human body (Miranda et al., 
2015). 
 
Besides protein, eggs are good source of other nutrients 
including vitamins A, E and B12, carotenoids (lutein, and 
zeaxanthin) and provide substantial amounts of choline, 
selenium, iron and zinc (Miranda et al., 2015). Egg yolk is 
a rich source of polyunsaturated fatty acids including 
palmitic acid, stearic acid and provides variable amount of 
n-3 fatty acids (Shinn, Proctor & Baum, 2018). Since 
dietary cholesterol from eggs is a minor determinant of 
blood cholesterol level and due to its’ high nutritional 
value (Kuang et al., 2018; Soliman,  2018), eggs should be 
recommended for consumption by all healthy individuals 
(Clayton, Fusco & Kern, 2017; Wang, Wong & Kim, 2019). 
For healthy adults, egg can be part of their daily intake 
although some limitation remains prudent. Thus, for 
adults with Type II Diabetes (Fuller et al., 2015; Richard 
et al., 2017) ) and dyslipidemia (Shin et al., 2013; Rong et 
al., 2013) a healthy diet would be to limit to three eggs per 
week (Li et al., 2013; Díez-Espino et al., 2017).  
 
 
7.3.6 Legumes 
 
Besides animal protein, plant protein such as legumes are 
generally good source of good quality protein with 20-
45% protein and generally rich in the essential amino acid 
lysine (Maphosa & Jideani
, 2017). However, except for soy 
protein, legumes are considered to be an incomplete 
source of protein because they are low in essential 
sulphur-containing amino acids (SCAA), methionine, 
cysteine, cystine and tryptophan (Kouris-Blazos & Belski, 
2016). 
 
Legumes are generally low in fat (with ±5% energy from 
fat, with exception of peanuts, chickpeas and soybeans), 
high in dietary ﬁbre (5-37%), almost free of saturated fats, 
contain no cholesterol and have about twice the protein 
content of cereal grains, and with low glycemic index 
rating (Leonard, 2012; Messina, 2016; Kouris-Blazos & 
Belski, 2016; FAO, 2016, Maphosa & Jideani, 2017). The fat 
in legumes is mainly from mono- and polyunsaturated 
fatty acids (PUFA) (Kouris-Blazos & Belski, 2016).   
 
Legumes are a good source of B-group vitamins (such as 
folate, thiamine and riboﬂ avin), iron, zinc, calcium and 
magnesium but not fat soluble vitamins and vitamin C 
(Brigide, Guidolin & Oliveira, 2014; Kouris-Blazos & Belski, 
2016). Although high in iron content, the bioavailability of 
iron in legume is poor, therefore it is encouraged to 
consume legumes with vitamin C rich foods to increase 
the absorption of iron (Messina, 2016).   
 
Research has shown that legumes contain non-nutrient 
bioactive compound such as phytochemicals and 
antioxidants, which help in the prevention of certain 
cancers, heart diseases, osteoporosis and chronic 
degenerative diseases (Bouchenak & Lamri-Senhadji, 
2013; Messina, 2016).   
 
Legumes are a good source of inexpensive and 
sustainable protein which provide many health beneﬁts. 
Therefore, consumption of legumes such as beans, peas 
should be recommended for everyone as part of a healthy 
diet. 
124 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
7.3.7 Nuts  
 
Nuts are nutrient dense foods, with high amounts of 
vegetable protein,
 fat (mostly unsaturated fatty acids), 
phytochemicals and antioxidants (Mohammadifard et al., 
2015; Rusu et al., 2019). Due to the high energy density of 
nuts, it was recommended that its consumption to be 
controlled to prevent weight gain. However, such 
assumption has been debated as the ingestion of nuts 
helps to control the satiety, leading to strong 
compensatory dietary responses (de Souza et al., 2017).   
 
Except for chestnuts with little fat, most nuts have a high 
total fat content, ranging from 46 to 76% that provide 
energy of 20 to 30 kJ/g (Emilio, 2010). However, the fatty 
acid content of nuts is good for health because the 
saturated fatty acid (SFA) is low, and nearly half of the fat 
content is from unsaturated fat, monounsaturated fatty 
acid (MUFA) and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), 
namely oleic acid and linoleic acid. 
 
Nuts are also rich in bioactive macronutrients such as L-
arginine that help in improving vascular reactivity 
(Mohammadifard et al., 2015; Rusu et al., 2019). Besides 
that, nuts also provide 4-5 g per 100 g of dietary ﬁber 
(Sugizaki & Naves, 2018). In terms of micronutrients, nuts 
contain folate and antioxidant vitamins (e.g., tocopherols). 
Although nuts are cholesterol-free but their chemical 
compound consist of plant sterols or phytosterols which 
help in lower blood cholesterol when present in sufficient 
amounts (Plat et al., 2019). 
 
In terms of mineral, nuts have optimal nutritional density 
to contribute to bone health such as calcium, magnesium 
and potassium (Orchard et al., 2014; Kong et al., 2017).    
However, it is important to note that this is only applied if 
the nuts are consumed without sodium added. 
 
As nuts are getting popular in cooking dishes and baking, 
and as snacks, they can make a healthy meal as plant-
based alternatives to animal protein such as meat, poultry 
and ﬁsh.   
 
 
7.3.8 Soybean foods  
 
In general ,
 soybean foods can be classiﬁ ed into two 
categories based on its fermentation process (Yang et al., 
2011). Fermented soybean foods include fermented tofu, 
miso, natto, soy sauces, and tempeh, while non-fermented 
soybean foods include fresh soybeans, dehydrated 
soybeans, soy sprouts, soy ﬂour, soymilk and its products 
such as tofu (soybean curd), okara and yuba (Yang et al.,  
(2011). Some of soybean foods are produced as traditional 
Asian foods, while some of them are produced via modern 
processing techniques by food industries (Chen et al., 
2012). Tofu, soymilk, tempeh, and meat analogues are 
popular soybean products.  
 
Although soybeans is under the plant-based protein 
source, it is considered as one of the excellent complete 
protein sources (Bolla, 2015; Rizzo & Baroni, 2018). 
Soybean foods are one of the most widely consumed 
legumes, and many of these products are consumed in 
various ways. Soybean foods are rich in protein, dietary 
ﬁber, unsaturated fat, vitamins (A, B6, B12, C and K) and 
minerals and various phytochemical such as isoﬂavones, 
anthocyanin, saponins, phytates, phytosterols, phenolic 
acids and trypsin inhibitors (Chen et al., 2012; Zhou, Cai 
& Xu., 2017; Tahir et al., 2018; Alghamdia et al., 2018). 
Health beneﬁts of consuming soybean foods include risk 
reduction of cardiovascular diseases, prevention of 
cancers (prostate and breast cancers), protection against 
osteoporosis and relieving premenstrual syndrome (PMS) 
and menopausal symptoms (Tahir et al., 2018; Blanco 
Mejia et al., 2019). 
 
Type of soybean foods: 
 
i. Tofu, also known as soybean curd, is made by 
coagulating soymilk with coagulant. There are two 
types of coagulant which are ‘salt’ coagulant 
(calcium sulphate and magnesium chloride) and 
‘acid’ coagulant (glucono delta-lactone) 
(Jooyandeh, 2011; Wong, 2017). The ‘acid’ 
coagulant is used to produce a softer version of 
tofu or known as ‘silken’ tofu. The precipitate is 
then pressed into solid, then dried, frozen or fried. 
Tofu has a bland taste with smooth and soft 
texture, creamy white appearance and pleasant 
mouthfeel (Maurya,  Shukla & Gour,  2018). Other 
soybean curd foods that are commonly consumed 
include taukua and fucuk. Besides a good source 
of complete protein, tofu is rich source of calcium, 
iron, manganese, selenium, phosphorus, copper, 
zinc, magnesium and vitamin B1 (Wong, 2017; Eze 
et al., 2018). 
 
ii. Soymilk is made from soaked soybeans by 
grinding, heating and ﬁltering. It is the biggest soy 
bean product consumed in the world as it is a 
plant-based milk alternative (Ma et al., 2016). 
Generally, consumers takes soymilk due to 
medical reasons such as lactose-intolerance and 
cow milk allergy; in addition, they consume due to 
lifestyle choices such as vegan and vegetarian diet 
as well as concerns related to cholesterol in cow 
milk (Ma et al., 2016; Jeske, Zannini & Arendt, 
2016; Vanga & Raghavan, 2018). Soymilk is an 
important source of protein especially for those 
following vegetarian diet. To dates, soymilk is the 
only plant-based milk alternative that have similar 
protein content with the cow’s milk when 
compared to almond milk and rice milk (Jeske, 
Zannini & Arendt,  2016; Vanga & Raghavan, 2018). 
Soy milk is a rich source of protein, unsaturated fat 
and other micronutrients such as magnesium, 
phosphorus and potassium (Vanga & Raghavan, 
2018). The concerns of soymilk are soy intolerance 
and contamination of soymilk due to Lactobacillus. 
The recommendation is that the best shelf life of 
commercial soya milk is less than 8 hours at room 
temperature (Ma et al., 2016). 
 
iii. Tempeh is known as one of the popular traditional 
soybean foods. It is produced by the fermentation 
of soybean with a mold of Rhizopus oligosporus to 
form a dense, chewy cake. Tempeh is high in 
125Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
protein, phosphorus, vitamin B12, and magnesium, 
while low in fats (Tahir et al., 2018). 
 
iv. Meat analogue is processed foods that are made 
to mimic the aesthetic qualities and chemical 
characteristic of meat, including it’s’ texture, 
colour, or taste. One of the main ingredients in 
meat analogue is textured soy protein (TSP) also 
known as textured vegetable protein (TVP), 
whereby TSP is made from soybeans and contains 
at least 52% protein on a dry basis (USAID, 2016). 
Examples of meat analogue are vegetarian 
chicken, ﬁsh, goose, and slice meat. However, 
some of the meat analogues do not contains TSP, 
and they are made from konjac, mushrooms and 
wheat ﬂour.  
 
 
7.3.9 Vegetarian 
 
About 2 million of Malaysians described themselves as 
vegetarian or vegan, including of those seasonal 
vegetarians (Vythilingam,
 2016). Vegetarian diets are 
deﬁned as diets that exclude meat including of that 
poultry and animal by-products such as gelatine. Types 
of other vegetarian diet are as the following: 
 
i. Lacto-ovo-vegetarians – eat both dairy products 
and eggs (this is the most common type of 
vegetarian diet) 
 
ii. Lacto-vegetarians – eat dairy products but not 
eggs 
 
iii. Ovo-vegetarians – eat eggs but not dairy products 
 
iv. Partial-vegetarians – eat seafood including 
freshwater saltwater ﬁ sh and shellﬁ sh (pesco-
vegetarian) or poultry (pollo-vegetarian) 
 
v. Vegan – eat only plant foods 
 
Vegetarian diets are recognized for their health enhancing 
properties as they are usually higher in ﬁbre, antioxidants, 
phytochemicals, caretonoids, plant protein and lower in 
saturated fat than non-vegetarian diets (Satija & Hu, 
2018). Pooled analysis of prospective cohort studies and 
randomized controlled trials reported that greater 
adherence to vegetarian diets were associated with 
reduced risk of coronary heart disease (CHD) (Dinu et al., 
2017) and improved cardiometabolic risk factors 
(Yokoyama et al., 2014; Yokoyama, Levin & Barnard, 2017; 
Viguiliouk et al., 2019), respectively. Despite the health 
promoting properties, vegetarian diets are commonly 
associated with vitamin and mineral deﬁ ciencies, 
particularly protein, iron, calcium, zinc, omega-3 fatty 
acids and vitamin B12. Well planned vegetarian diets can 
provide all the nutrients recommended for an individual. 
Therefore, it is important that vegetarians consume a 
variety of foods such as whole grains, legumes, nuts and 
seeds and the right amount of foods to meet the nutrient 
needs.  
 
 
7.3.10 Deﬁciencies  
 
7.3.10.1 Protein de
ﬁciency  
 
Protein deﬁciency can occur at any age due to illness or 
poor diets, and is frequently exacerbated by inadequate 
energy intake
. Dietary protein deﬁ ciency not only 
contributes to poor growth, cardiovascular dysfunction, 
and high risk of infectious disease, but also exacerbates 
the deﬁciency of other nutrients (including vitamin A and 
iron) and worsens metabolic pro ﬁles (e.g., dyslipidemia 
and hyperglycemia) in humans (Wu, 2016).  
 
Inadequate protein intake during gestation and early 
childhood has far-reaching adverse consequences. 
Protein undernutrition resulted in impaired growth of 
fetuses and stunting in children (Semba et al., 2016). 
 
Among the older adults, protein undernutrition is 
associated with larger loss of lean body mass (Deer & 
Volpi, 2015) which will exacerbate sarcopenia and further 
compromise skeletal-muscle functions. Protein 
undernutrition is also an established underlying factor for 
osteoporotic fractures and increased risk of injury in this 
population age group (Amarya, Singh & Sabharwal, 2015). 
 
 
7.3.10.2 Iron deﬁciency and iron deﬁciency 
anaemia 
 
Iron deﬁciency refers to a condition wherein iron stores 
in the body is reduced. Iron-deﬁciency anaemia is a more 
severe condition in which low levels of iron are associated 
with decreased quantity of red blood cells and presence 
of microcytic hypochromic red cells (Camaschella, 2015). 
Iron de
ﬁciency anaemia is the most prevalent anaemia 
worldwide. (WHO/ UNICEF/ UNU, 2001; Kassebaum et al., 
2014). Among other underlying factors resulting in iron 
deﬁciency anaemia, insufficient dietary iron intake is the 
most common cause. 
 
Iron deﬁciency anaemia has a detrimental e ffect across 
all age group. It is associated with impairment on 
cognitive development in children, poorer physical 
performance and work productivity in adults and 
unfavorable maternal and fetal outcomes (Camaschella, 
2015; Di Renzo et al., 2015; Auerbach & Adamson, 2016). 
Furthermore, anaemia is positively associated with global 
cognitive decline and incidence of dementia among the 
older adults (Lopez et al., 2016). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
126 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
7.3.11 Excessive intake  
 
Animal foods such as meat and ﬁ sh may be processed 
before consumption by smoking,
 curing, salting or by 
adding preservatives. Meat and ﬁsh are also often cooked 
using very high temperature during frying, grilling 
(broiling) or barbecuing (charbroiling). These methods of 
processing and preparation may aff ect chemical 
composition as well as the nutritional value of animal 
foods (WCRF/ AICR, 2018). High consumption of these 
foods may associate with some health risk, such as 
cancers, CVD and diabetes.  
 
 
7.3.11.1 Cancer risk 
 
Consistent evidence showing that consumption of red 
meat and processed meat increases the risk of colorectal 
cancer,
 with an updated cancer report summarized that 
red meat and processed meat to be “convincing” factors 
contributed to colorectal cancer (Zhao et al., 2017; WCRF/ 
AICR, 2018). Further, a consumption of Cantonese-style 
salted ﬁsh is probably a cause of nasopharyngeal cancer 
(Salehiniya et al., 2018; WCRF/ AICR, 2018).  
 
 
7.3.11.2 CVD, diabetes and mortality risks 
 
A recent study found that red and processed meat 
consumption in a low meat intake population was found 
to have moderately higher risks of all-cause and CVD 
mortality (Alshahrani et al., 2019). Similarly, two meta-
analysis on prospective cohorts,
 reported that a higher 
consumption of total red meat and processed meat is 
associated with increased risk of total mortality as well as 
cardiovascular and cancer mortality (Larsson & Orsini, 
2014; Wang et al., 2016). Another systematic review and 
meta-analysis of observational studies reported that the 
intake of processed meat was associated with higher risk 
of coronary heart disease (CHD) and diabetes mellitus 
(Micha, Michas & Mozaffarian, 2012; Micha et al., 2013). 
 
These data indicate the urgency to monitor the red meat 
and proceeds meat consumption among the community. 
 
 
 
7.4 Current status 
 
Based on the Malaysian Adult Nutrition Survey (MANS) 
conducted among Malaysian adults aged 18-59 years old 
in 2003 and 2014, Malaysian adults tend to consume 
adequate to high levels of protein (80% to over 100% RNI). 
In the MANS 2014 report itself, about half of the adults 
(50.7%) were found to have exceeded the recommended 
protein contribution to total energy intake (10-20%) based 
on RNI 2017 (NCCFN, 2017). In terms of median protein 
intake, there was an increase of median protein intake of 
Malaysian adults from 55.3 g/day (14.3% of total energy 
intake) in 2003 to 56.7 g/day (16% of total energy intake) 
in 2014. 
 
Based on the MANS 2014 report, Ahmad Ali et al. (2014) 
reported that the protein source foods consumed daily by 
most adults were marine ﬁ sh and hen egg. Marine ﬁ sh 
ranked the fourth highest among 10 protein source foods 
that were most commonly consumed daily by Malaysian 
followed by hen egg at the ninth ranked.  
 
For a weekly basis consumption, it was reported that hen 
eggs were the leading food consumed with the 
consumption frequency of 3 pieces each time, followed 
by chicken, marine ﬁsh and other types of legumes [long 
bean, French bean and winged bean (kacang botol)]. Nuts 
on the other hand were found to be less consumed by the 
respondents as these foods were not feature in the top 10 
daily or weekly consumed items (Ahmad Ali et al., 2014). 
 
In term of assessment of how many Malaysian adults met 
the recommendation of the Malaysian Food Pyramid, 
Mohamad Hasnan et al. (2015) in his study reported that 
66.8% of Malaysian adults met the recommended serving 
per day for food category of meat, poultry and egg 
followed by 31.3% for ﬁsh and ﬁsh product and 17.1% for 
legumes and nut. Fish (38.6%), and meat, poultry and egg 
(13.1%) were amongst the top three food groups 
consumed over the recommended serving per day. 
Legumes and nuts consistently were not the favorite 
protein sources for Malaysian as the consumption was 
below the recommended serving per day. 
 
 
 
 
127Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
7.5 Key Recommendations  
Key Recommendation 1 
 
Consume ﬁsh everyday. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. Consume a serving of 
ﬁsh daily.  
 
2. Choose a variety of ﬁsh or shellﬁ sh, either 
from marine or freshwater. 
 
 
Key Recommendation 2 
 
Consume lean meat or poultry or eggs daily.  
 
How to Achieve 
 
1.
Consume a variety of dishes from lean meat 
or poultry or egg as recommended. 
 
2. Limit intake of organ meats (liver, spleen 
and kidney). 
 
3. Limit intake of processed meats. Processed 
meat or poultry such as luncheon meats, 
nuggets, sausages, burgers and ﬁ sh balls 
are generally higher in fat, salt and 
preservatives (e.g., nitrates). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Recommendation 3 
 
Practice healthy food preparation and cooking 
methods for ﬁsh, meat,
 poultry and egg dishes. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1.
Choose lean cuts of meat and poultry to 
minimize the intake of saturated fat. Trim 
away as much as possible the visible fat 
before cooking. 
 
2. Choose skinless chicken parts or remove 
the skin before cooking. Skinless chicken 
breasts are the leanest poultry choices. 
 
3. Limit deep-frying methods as deep – frying 
add fat and calorie to these dishes. 
 
4. Use healthier cooking methods such as 
steaming, stewing, braising, boiling, 
poaching, microwaving, grilling, roasting 
(allowing the fat to drip off) and air frying. 
 
5. Limit breading and battering as this adds 
fat and calories that will cause the food to 
soak up more fat or oil during frying. 
 
6. Use herbs and spices, lime or lemon to 
season and ﬂ avour dishes instead of salt, 
ﬂavour enhancer or rich sauces (e.g., 
mayonnaise, oyster sauce, chilli or tomato 
sauce). 
 
 
Key Recommendation 4 
 
Consume legumes daily. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. Consume a serving of legumes daily.  
 
2
. Choose a variety of diff erent types of 
legumes (dhal, tempe and tauhu) to prepare 
dishes. 
 
3. Consume legumes as snacks or add to the 
dishes.   
 
4. Consume nuts in small handful (at least 4 
times a week) because they are high in 
calories. 
 
5. Consume one serving of legumes (dhal, 
tempeh, tauhu and etc.) as part of your daily 
protein intakes. 
 
 
 

128 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
7.6 References 
 
Ahmad Ali Z, Anida@Azhana Husna Z, Balkish MN, Chin Cheow K, Laila Rabaah AS, Mohamad Hasnan A, Nur 
Hidayah J, Riyanti S (2014). Food Consumption Statistics ofd Malaysia: Finding of the Malaysian Adult 
Nutrition Survey (MANS). Institut of Public Health, Ministry of Health. 
 
Bouchenak M & Lamri-Senhadji M (2013). Nutritional quality of legumes, and their role in cardiometabolic risk 
prevention: A review. J Medic Food 16(3):185-198. 
 
Alexander DD, Miller PE, Van Elswyk ME, Kuratko CN & Bylsma L (2017). A meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials and prospective cohort studies of eicosapentaenoic and docosahexaenoic long-chain 
omega-3 fatty acids and coronary heart disease risk.  Mayo Clin Proc 92(1):15-29. doi: 
10.1016/j.mayocp.2016.10.018. 
 
Alghamdia SS, Khan MA, El-Hartya EH, Ammar MH, Farooqac M & Migdadia HM (2018). Comparative 
phytochemical proﬁling of different soybean (Glycine max (L.) Merr) genotypes using GC–MS. Saudi J 
Biol Sci 25(1):15-21 
 
Alshahrani SM, Fraser GE, Sabaté J, Knutsen R, Shavlik D, Mashchak A, Lloren JI & Orlich MJ (2019). Red and 
processed meat and mortality in a low meat intake population. Nutrients 11(3):622. 
doi:10.3390/nu11030622. 
 
Amarya S, Singh K & Sabharwal M (2015). Changes during aging and their association with malnutrition. J Clin 
Gerontol Geriatrics 6(3):78-84. 
 
Auerbach M & Adamson JW(2016). How we diagnose and treat iron deﬁciency anemia. Am. J Hematol 91:31-
38. 
 
Bernstein AS, Oken E & Ferranti S (2019). Fish, shellﬁsh, and children’s health. An assessment of beneﬁts, risks, 
and sustainability. Pediatatrics 143(6):e20190999. 
 
Blanco Mejia S, Messina M, Li SS, Viguiliouk E, Chiavaroli L, Khan TA, Srichaikul K, Mirrahimi A, Sievenpiper JL, 
Kris-Etherton P & Jenkins DJA (2019). A meta-analysis of 46 studies identiﬁed by the FDA demonstrates 
that soy protein decreases circulating LDL and total cholesterol concentrations in adults. J Nutr 
149(6):968-981. doi: 10.1093/jn/nxz020. 
 
Bolla KN (2015). Soy bean consumption and health beneﬁts. IJSTR 4(07):50-53.   
 
Bouchenak M & Lamri-Senhadji M (2013). Nutritional quality of legumes, and their role in cardiometabolic risk 
prevention: A review. J Medic Food 16(3):185-198. 
 
Brigide P, Guidolin CS & Oliveira SM (2014). Nutritional characteristics of biofortiﬁed common beans. Food Sci 
Techno(Campinas) 34(3):493-500. 
 
Calder PC (2014). Very long chain omega3 (n3) fatty acids and human health. Eur J Lipid Sci Technol 116:1280-
1300. 
 
Camaschella C (2015). Iron-deﬁciency anemia. N Engl J Med 372:1832-1843. 
 
Chen K, Erh M, Su N, Liu W, Chou C & Cheng K (2012). Soyfood and soybean products: From traditional use to 
modern applications. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 96:9-22. 
 
Chowdhury R, Stevens S, Gorman D, Pan A, Warnakula S, Chowdhury S, Ward H, Johnson L, Crowe, Hu FB & 
Franco OH (2012). Association between ﬁsh consumption, long chain omega 3 fatty acids, and risk of 
cerebrovascular disease: Systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 345:e6698. 
 
Clayton ZS, Fusco E & Kern M (2017). Egg consumption and heart health: A review.  Nutrition 37:79-85. doi: 
10.1016/j.nut.2016.12.014 
 
Cobos Á & Díaz O (2015). Chemical composition of meat and meat products. In: Cheung P., Mehta B (Eds.). 
Handbook of Food Chemistry. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 
 
de Souza RGM, Schincaglia RM , Pimentel GD & Mota JF (2017). Nuts and human health outcomes: A systematic 
review. Nutrients 9:1311. doi:10.3390/nu9121311. 
129Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Deer RR & Volpi E (2015). Protein intake and muscle function in older adults. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 
18(3):248-253. 
 
Del Gobbo LC & Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic (2016). -3 polyunsaturated fatty acid 
biomarkers and coronary heart disease pooling project of 19 cohort studies. JAMA Intern Med 
176(8):1155-1166. 
 
Diez-Espino J, Basterra-Gortari FJ, Salas-Salvado J, Buil-Cosiales P, Corella D, Schroder H, Estruch R, Ros E, 
Gomez-Gracia E, Aros F, Fiol M, Lapetra J, Serra-Majem L, Pinto X, Babio N, Quiles L, Fito M, Marti A, 
Toledo E & PREDIMED Investigators (2017).  Egg consumption and cardiovascular disease according to 
diabetic status: The PREDIMED study.  Clin Nutr 36(4):1015-1021.  doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2016.06.0091}. 
 
Di Renzo GC, Spano F, Giardina I, Brillo E, Graziano C & Roura LC (2015). Iron deﬁciency anemia in pregnancy. 
Womens Health 11(6):891-900. 
 
Dinu M, Abbate R, Gensini GF, Casini A & Soﬁ F (2017). Vegetarian, vegan diets and multiple health outcomes: 
A systematic review with meta-analysis of observational studies. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 57(17):3640-
3649. doi: 10.1080/10408398.2016.1138447 
 
Emilio Rose (2010). Health beneﬁts of nuts consumption. Nutrients Journal 2:652-682 
 
Endo J & Makoto Arita M (2016). Cardioprotective mechanism of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids. J 
Cardiology 67:22-27. 
 
Eze NM, Okwume UG, Eseadi C, Udenta EA, Onyeke NG, Ugwu EN, Akubue BN, Nioku HA & Ezeanwu AB 
(2018). Acceptability and consumption of tofu as a meat alternative among secondary school boarders 
in Enugu State, Nigeria. Medicine 97(45):e13155. doi: 10.1097/md.0000000000013155. 
 
FAO/ WHO (2010). Report of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on the Risks and Beneﬁ ts of Fish 
Consumption. FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Report No. 978. FAO Food and Nutrition, Rome. 
 
FAO (2015). Composition of Meat. (Accessed on 2 October 2020) 
 
FAO (2016).  Legumes can help ﬁght climate change, hunger and obesity in Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and World Health Organization, Santiago de 
Chile. 
 
FAO (2019). Meat & Meat Products. (Accessed on 2 October 2020) 
 
Fernandes AC, Medeiros CO, Bernardo GL, Ebone MV, Di Pietro PF, Assis MAA & Vasconvelos FAG (2012). 
Beneﬁts and risks of ﬁsh consumption for the human health. Rev. Nutr Campinas 25(2):283-295. 
 
Fuller NR, Sainsbury A, Caterson ID & Markovic TP (2015). Egg consumption and human cardio-metabolic 
health in people with and without diabetes. Nutrients 7(9):7399-7420. doi: 10.3390/nu7095344. 
 
Henry CJ, Xinyan Bia X, Lima J & Laua E (2016). Mineral decline due to modernization of food habits. Food 
Chem190:194-196. 
 
IARC (2015). Carcinogenicity of consumption of red and processed meat. Lancet Oncol 16(16):1599-1600. 
 
Jeske S, Zannini E & Arendt E (2016). Evaluation of physicochemical and glycaemic properties of commercial 
plant-based milk substitutes. Plant Foods Hum Nutr 72(1):26-33. doi: 10.1007/s11130-016-0583-0. 
 
Jooyandeh H (2011). Soy products as healthy and functional foods. Middle-East J Sci Res 7(1):71-80. 
 
Kassebaum NJ, Jasrasaria R, Naghavi M, Wulf SK, Johns N, Lozano R, Regan M, Weatherall D, Chou DP, Eisele 
TP, Flaxman SR, Pullan RL, Brooker SJ, Murray CJ (2014). A systemic analysis of global anemia burden 
from 1990 to 2010. Blood 123(5):615–624. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-06-508325. 
 
Keeton JT & Dikeman ME (2017). ‘Red’ and ‘white’ meats – terms that lead to confusion. Anim Front 74:29-33. 
 
Kong SH, Kim JH, Hong AR, Lee JH, Kim SW & Shin CS (2017). Dietary potassium intake is beneﬁcial to bone 
health in a low calcium intake population: The Korean National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
(KNHANES) (2008-2011). Osteoporos Int. 28(5):1577-1585 
130 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Kouris-Blazos A & Belski R (2016). Health bene ﬁts of legumes and pulses with a focus on Australian sweet 
lupins. Asian Pac J Clin Nutr 21(1):1-17. 
 
Krajcovicova-Kudlackova M, Simoncic R, Bederova A, Babinska K & Beder I (2000). Correlation of carnitine levels 
to methionine and lysine intake. Physiol Res 49:399-402 
 
Kuang H, Yang F, Zhang Y, Wang T & Chen G (2018). The impact of egg nutrient composition and its consumption 
on cholesterol homeostasis. . 
 
 &  (2014). Red meat and processed meat consumption and all-cause mortality: A meta-analysis. Am J Epidemiol 
179(3):282-289. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwt261 
 
Leonard E (2012). Cultivating good health. In: Grains and Legumes Nutrition Council.  pp.3-18. ISSN 1039-6217. 
Cadillac Printing, Adelaide. 
 
Li Y, Zhou C, Zhou X & Li L (2013).  Egg consumption and risk of cardiovascular diseases and diabetes: A meta-
analysis.  Atherosclerosis 229(2):524-530. doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2013.04.003. 
  
Lopez A, Caboub P, Macdougall PI & Peyrin-Biroulet L (2016). Iron deﬁciencfy anaemia.  Lancet 387(10021):907-
916. 
 
Ma X, Hu X, Liu L, Li X, Ma Z, Chen J & Wei X (2016). The quality changes and microﬂora analysis of commercial 
instant soya milk. Food Sci & Nutr 5(1):123-130. doi: 10.1002/fsn3.371. 
 
Maphosa Y & Jideani VA (2017).  The role of legumes in human nutrition. In: Hueda MC (Ed.). Functional Food 
– Improve Health through Adequate Food. IntechOpen. doi: 10.5772/intechopen.69127.  
 
Maurya SB, Shukla SS & Gour L (2018). Nutritional quality of tofu (soy paneer) as affecting by gamma irradiation 
during storage. Int J Chem Stud 6(1):879-883. 
 
McNeill SH (2014). Inclusion of red meat in healthful dietary patterns. Meat Sci 98:452-460. 
 
Messina MJ (2016). Legumes and soybeans : Overview of their nutritional proﬁles and health effects.  Asia Pac 
J Clin Nutr 25(1):1-17. 
 
Micha R, Michas G & Mozaffarian D (2012). Unprocessed red and processed meats and risk of coronary artery 
disease and type 2 diabetes–an updated review of the evidence. Curr Atheroscler Rep14(6):515-524. doi: 
10.1007/s11883-012-0282-8 
 
Micha R, Michas G, Lajous M & Moza ffarian D (2013). Processing of meats and cardiovascular risk: Time to 
focus on preservatives. BMC Med 11:136. doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-11-136. 
 
Miranda JM, Anton X, Redondo-Valbuena C, Roca-Saavedra P, Rodriguez JA, Lamas A, Franco CM & Cepeda 
A (2015). Egg and egg-derived foods: eff ects on human health and use as functional foods. Nutrients 
7(1):706-29. doi: 10.3390/nu7010706. 
 
Mohamad Hasnan A, Khoo YY, Yusuf S & Foo LH (2015). Food intake among Malaysian adults: Are we meeting 
individualized recommendations? Med J Malaysia 70(Supp 1):66. 
 
Mohammadifard N, Salehi-Abargouei A, Salas-Salvadó J, Guasch-Ferré M, Humphries K & Sarrafzadegan N 
(2015). The effect of tree nut, peanut, and soy nut consumption on blood pressure: A systematic review 
and meta-analysis of randomized controlled clinical trials. Am J Clin Nutr 101:966-982.  
 
Mozaffarian D & Wu JH (2011). Omega-3 fatty acids and cardiovascular disease: Effects on risk factors, molecular 
pathways, and clinical events. J Am Coll Cardiol 58(20):2047-2067. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2011.06.063. 
 
NCCFN (2017). Recommended Nutrient Intake for Malaysians. National Coordinating Committee on Food and 
Nutrition, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya.  
 
NSW Food Authority (2009). Preservative Use in Processed Meats: Licensee guidance. NSW Food Authority, 
Australia. 
 
131Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Nurnadia AA, Azrina A, Amin I, Mohd Yunus AS & Mohd Izuan Effendi H (2013). Mineral contents of selected 
marine ﬁsh and shellﬁsh from the west coast of Peninsular Malaysia. Internat Fd Res Journal 20(1):431-
437. 
 
Orchard TS, Larson JC, Alghothani N, Bout-Tabaku S, Cauley JA, Chen Z, Lacroix AZ, Wactawski-Wende J & 
Jackson RD (2014). Magnesium intake, bone mineral density, and fractures: Results from the Women’s 
Health Initiative Observational Study. Am J Clin Nutr 99:926-33. 
 
Plat J, Baumgartner S, Vanmierlo T, Lütjohann D, Calkins KL, Burrin DG, Guthrie G, Thijs C, Te Velde AA, 
Vreugdenhil ACE, Sverdlov R, Garssen J, Wouters K, Trautwein EA, Wolfs TG, van Gorp C, Mulder MT, 
Riksen NP, Groen AK & Mensink RP (2019). Plant-based sterols and stanols in health & disease: 
“Consequences of human development in a plant-based environment?” Prog Lipid Res 74:87-102 
 
Raji CA, Erickson KI, Lopez OL, Kuller LH, Gach HM, Thompson PM, Riverol M & Becker JT (2014). Regular ﬁsh 
consumption and age-related brain gray matter loss. Am J Prev Med 47(4): 444-451. doi: 
10.1016/j.amepre.2014.05.037 
 
Richard C, Cristall L, Fleming E, Lewis ED, Ricupero M, Jacobs RL & Field CJ (2017). Impact of egg consumption 
on cardiovascular risk factors in individuals with type 2 diabetes and at risk for developing diabetes: A 
systematic review of randomized nutritional intervention studies. Can J Diabetes 41(4):453–463. 
 
Rizzo G & Baroni L (2018). Soy, soy foods and their role in vegetarian diets. Nutrients 10(1):43. doi: 
10.3390/nu10010043 
 
Rong Y, Chen L, Zhu T, Song Y, Yu M, Shan Z, Sands A, Hu FB & Liu L (2013). Egg consumption and risk of 
coronary heart disease and stroke: Dose-response meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. BMJ 
346:e8539.   
 
Rusu E, Mocan A, Ferreira R & Popa S (2019). Health bene ﬁts of nut consumption in middle-aged and elderly 
population. Antioxidants 8:302.   doi:10.3390/antiox8080302.  
 
Salehiniya H, Mohammadian M, Mohammadian-Hafshejani A & Mahdavifar N (2018). Nasopharyngeal cancer 
in the world: Epidemiology, incidence, mortality and risk factors. WCRJ 5(1):1–8. 
 
Satija A & Hu FB (2018). Plant-based diets and cardiovascular health. Trends Cardiovasc Med 28(7):437-441. doi: 
10.1016/j.tcm.2018.02.004 
 
Seman DL, Boler DD, Carr CC, Dikeman ME, Owens CM, Keeton JT, Pringle TD, Sindelar JJ, Woerner DR, de Mello 
AS & Powell TH (2018). Meat Science Lexicon. Meat and Muscle Biology 2(1):127-141 
 
Semba RD, Shardell M, Sakr Ashour FA, Moaddel R, Trehan I, Maleta KM, Ordiz MI, Kraemer K, Khadeer MA, 
Ferrucci L & Manary MJ (2016). Child stunting is associated with low circulating essential amino acids.  
EBioMedicine 6:246-252. 
 
Shin JY, Xun P, Nakamura Y & He K (2013). Egg consumption in relation to risk of cardiovascular disease and 
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis.  Am J Clin Nutr 98(1):146-159. 
 
Shinn S E, Proctor A & Baum JI (2018). Egg yolk as means for providing essential and bene ﬁcial fatty acids. J 
Am Oil Chem’ Soc 95:5-11. 
 
Soliman GA (2018). Dietary cholesterol and the lack of evidence in cardiovascular disease. Nutrients 10(6):780. 
doi: 10.3390/nu10060780.  
 
Sugizaki CSA & Naves MMV (2018). Potential prebiotic properties of nuts and edible seeds and their relationship 
to obesity. Nutrients 10(11):1645. doi: 10.3390/nu10111645 
 
Tahir A, Anwar M, Mubeen H &  Raza S (2018). Evaluation of physicochemical and nutritional contents in 
soybean fermented food tempeh by Rhizopus oligosporus. J Adv Biol Biotechnol 17(1):1-9. doi: 
10.9734/jabb/2018/26770. 
 
Tørris C, Småstuen MC & Molin M (2018). Nutrients in ﬁsh and possible associations with cardiovascular disease 
risk factors in metabolic syndrome. Nutrients 23:10(7). doi: 10.3390/nu10070952. 
 
 
132 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
USAID (2016). Agriculture and Food Security. Textured Soy Protein Commodity Fact Sheet. United States Agency 
for International Development. . (Accessed on 2 October 2020). 
 
USDHHS & USDA (2015). Dietary Guidelines for Americans (2015–2020). 8th ed. Department of Health and 
Human Services and U.S. Department of Agriculture.  
http://health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/guidelines/. 
 
USDA (2018). National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference.  
 
  
Vanga SK & Raghavan V (2018). How well do plant based alternatives fare nutritionally compared to cow’s milk? 
J Food Sci Technol 55(1):10-20. doi:10.1007/s13197-017-2915-y 
 
Viguiliouk E, Kendall CW, Kahleová H, Rahelić D, Salas-Salvadó J, Choo VL, Mejia SB, Stewart SE, Leiter LA, 
Jenkins DJ & Sievenpiper JL (2019). Effect of vegetarian dietary patterns on cardiometabolic risk factors 
in diabetes: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Clin Nutr 38(3):1133-
1145. 
 
Vythilingam P (2016). Beneﬁts of Being Vegetarian. The Star, Kuala Lumpur.  https://www. pressreader.com › 
malaysia › 20161121. (Accessed on 2 October 2020). 
 
Wang X, Lin X, Ouyang YY, Liu J, Zhao G, Pan A & Hu FB (2016). Red and processed meat consumption and 
mortality: Dose–response meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Public Health Nutr 19(5):893-905. 
 
Wang MX, Wong CH & Kim JE (2019). Impact of whole egg intake on blood pressure, lipids and lipoproteins in 
middle-aged and older population: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled 
trials. Nutr Metab Cardiovas 29(7):653-664. 
 
WCRF/ AICR (World Cancer Research Fund/ American Institute for Cancer Research) W(2018). Meat, Fish and 
Dairy Products and the Risk of Cancer. Continuous Update Project Expert Report 2018.  World Cancer 
Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research, London. 
 
Weichselbaum W, Coe S, Buttriss J & Stanner S (2013).  Fish in the diet: A review.  Nutr Bull 38(2):128-177. 
 
WHO/ UNICEF/ UNU (2001). Iron Deﬁ ciency Anaemia: Assessment, Prevention, and Control. A guide for 
Programme Managers. World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland:  
 
WHO (2007). Protein and Amino Acid Requirements in Human Nutrition.  Report of a joint FAO/WHO/UNU 
expert consultation. World Health Organization, Geneva. 
 
Wong KF (2017). Tofu and Soy for Health Beneﬁts. University of Miami, Florida, USA. 
 
Wu G (2016). Dietary protein intake and human health. Food Funct 7(3):1251-1265. 
 
Yang HJ, Park S, Pak V, Chung K & Kwon D (2011). Fermented soybean products and their bioactive compounds. 
In H El-Shemy (Ed.). Soybean and Health. InTech Open. doi: 10.5772/10670. 
 
Yokoyama Y, Nishimura K, Barnard ND, Takegami M, Watanabe M, Sekikawa A, Okamura T & Miyamoto Y (2014). 
Vegetarian diets and blood pressure: A meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med 174(4):577-587. 
 
Yokoyama Y, Levin SM & Barnard ND (2017). Association between plant-based diets and plasma lipids: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Nutr Rev 75(9):683-698. 
 
Zhang Y, Chen J, Qiu J, Li Y, Wang J & Jiao J (2016). Intakes of ﬁsh and polyunsaturated fatty acids and mild-to-
severe cognitive impairment risks: A dose-response meta-analysis of 21 cohort studies. Am J Clin Nutr 
103:330-340. 
 
Zhao Z, Feng Q, Yin Z, Shuang J, Bai B & Yu P (2017). Red and processed meat consumption and colorectal 
cancer risk: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Oncotarget 8(47):83306-83314. 
 
Zhou R, Cai W & Xu B (2017). Phytochemical proﬁles of black and yellow soybeans as affected by roasting. Int 
J Food Prop 20(12):3179-3190. 
133Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
healthy food
KEY 
MESSAGE
8
Consume adequate amounts 
of milk and milk products
8.1 Terminology  
Raw or fresh milk and processed milk 
 
Milk, raw milk or fresh milk means the 
normal,
 clean, fresh mammary secretion of healthy 
cow, buffalo, goat or sheep that is properly fed and 
kept, excluding that obtained during the four days 
immediately following calving. Fresh milk 
generally contains about 3% of milk fat. Unless it is 
pasteurised, it is best to boil fresh milk before 
consumption. 
 
Pasteurised milk is milk that has been 
efficiently heat-treated by the holding method or 
by the high temperature short time (HTST) 
method. 
 
Sterilized milk is milk which has been  ﬁltered,
  
homogenized and thereafter heated to and 
maintained at a temperature of not less than 100°C 
for length to time sufficient. 
 
 
Ultra-high temperature (UHT) milk  is milk 
which has been subjected to heat treatment by 
being retained at a temperature of not less than 
135
oC for at least two seconds to render it 
commercially sterile and immediately aseptically 
packed in sterile containers. 
 
Recombined milk is the product prepared from 
the constituents of milk combined with water or 
milk or both and has been subjected to 
pasteurisation, sterilisation or UHT
. 
 
Flavoured milk is milk or recombined milk to 
which permitted ﬂ avouring substance has been 
added and may contain sugar or salt or both. It 
shall have been heat-treated such as 
pasteurisation or UHT. 
 
Full cream milk powder or dried full 
cream milk
 is milk or recombined milk from 
which the water has been removed. Full cream 
milk powder contains more than 26% of milk fat. 
134 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
88
KEY MESSAGE
CONSUME ADEQUATE 
AMOUNTS OF MILK AND MILK 
PRODUCTS
Prof. Dr. Hamid Jan Jan Mohamed, Prof. Dr. Winnie Chee Siew Swee,  
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Satvinder Kaur and Ms. Nur Shafawati Mohd Ghazali
135Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Skimmed/ non-fat milk is milk from which 
milk fat has been removed but with most of the 
other essential nutrients intact. It is useful for 
those who want to limit their intake of energy, fat 
and cholesterol
. 
 
Low fat milk is milk which contains not more 
than 1.5 g of fat per 100 ml of milk. 
 
Reconstituted milk is the liquid product 
prepared by the addition of water to full cream 
milk powder and shall be subjected to 
pasteurisation, sterilisation or UHT
. 
 
Evaporated milk or unsweetened 
condensed milk is the product  obtained by 
evaporating from milk, a portion of its water or by 
recombining of milk constituents and part 
evaporation. 
 
F
illed milk is the product where the milk fat has 
been replaced wholly or partly by an equivalent 
amount of edible vegetable oil or edible vegetable 
fat or a combination of these,
 such as palm oil.  
 
Fermented milk or cultured milk is the 
product prepared by culturing pasteurized milk, 
sterilised milk,
 recombined milk, pasteurised 
cream or reduced cream with suitable lactic acid 
bacteria and include yoghurt, cultured cream and 
lassi. 
  
Condensed milk or sweetened condensed 
milk is the product obtained by evaporating from 
milk, a portion of its water or by recombining milk 
constituents and adding sugar to the remainder
. 
Condensed milk or sweetened condensed milk 
contains more than 8% of milk fat. 
 
Milk products 
 
Milk products include any product prepared from 
milk as main ingredient and includes the food or 
which a standard is prescribed in regulations such 
as yoghurt and cheese.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.2 Introduction 
 
Milk is one of the most complete of all foods, containing 
nearly all the constituents of nutritional importance to 
humans. Milk and milk products are the richest source of 
calcium in the diet that is readily absorbed. These foods 
are also important contributors of protein, vitamin A, 
vitamin D, riboﬂavin, vitamin B12 and zinc to the diet. In 
contrast, plant-based milk beverages such as soy milk 
and almond milk contains a lower level of essential 
nutrients such as protein and vitamin D which are 
important for bone health. Furthermore, the bioavailability 
of calcium and iron from plant-based milk is lower 
compared to animal milk. This is due to considerable 
amount of mineral inhibitory substances such as oxalate 
and phytates which chelates to calcium and iron to form 
insoluble salt compound (Walters, Esfandi & Tsopmo, 
2018). Hence, among healthy individuals, replacing 
animal-based milk with plant-based milk is not 
recommended (Keller et al., 2012).  
 
Sweetened condensed milk and sweetened condensed 
ﬁlled milk are highly evaporated milk to which sugar has 
been added. Its high sugar content (up to 40% sugar) 
gives it a long shelf life even without refrigeration. It is 
not recommended for feeding infants and young children 
because after dilution, its nutrient content is very low. It 
is more often used in baking and the preparation of 
desserts. A non-dairy creamer, commonly used as tea or 
coffee whitener is a liquid or granular substance made of 
oil, corn syrup and sodium caseinate. It should not be 
considered as milk.  
 
Milk products can be made from cow’s milk or any other 
milk producing animals such as goat, buffalo, sheep and 
camel. Milk products include food products made from 
milk as a main ingredient such as yoghurt and cheese. 
Yoghurt is described as fermented milk with lactic acid 
bacteria. Cheese is the product derived from milk and 
produced by coagulation of the milk with casein. The 
solids (curd) are separated from the liquid (whey) and 
pressed into ﬁnal form of cheese. Butter is also an example 
of milk products but it is not described here as due to its 
high fat content (approximately 80% butterfat), it is 
described in the fat section. 
 
There are various types of milk. The main di fferences 
being the process used to produce the ﬁ nal product 
(MOH, 1985). Consumers should read the label of milk 
packages to identify the types of milk.  
136 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
8.3 Scientiﬁc basis  
 
Milk contains essential nutrients including fat, 
carbohydrate (lactose), protein, calcium, phosphorous, 
magnesium, and several trace elements and vitamins like 
thiamine, riboﬂ avin, niacin and vitamin A. Calcium 
content from milk has the highest amount of absorbable 
calcium per serving compared to other calcium-rich plant 
foods (Hodges et al., 2019). Thus, adding milk and milk 
products such as yoghurt and cheese in an individual’s 
diet makes meeting calcium requirements easier.  
 
There has been some scientiﬁc debate lately on the health 
beneﬁts of milk and milk products. Nevertheless, most 
meta-analyses of observational studies and randomised 
controlled trials support the evidence that dairy intake not 
only contributes to meet nutrient recommendations but 
may also protect against the most prevalent chronic 
diseases (Thorning et al., 2016).  Milk and dairy products 
are evidenced to contain nutrients that are required for 
skeletal growth and bone maintenance during adulthood 
with the aim to reduce osteoporosis and bone fractures 
in older age (Rizzoli, 2014). Milk contains substantial 
amount of proteins, calcium, magnesium, phosphorous 
and may be fortiﬁed with vitamins D and K that support 
skeletal health compared to other foods.  
 
There is some concern also that milk and milk products 
contain saturated fats and cholesterol and excessive 
consumption can have negative eff ects on health. 
Although some types of milk and milk products may be 
high in fat and saturated fats, the overall evidence from 
meta-analysis indicated that intake of milk and dairy 
products around 1 serving of 200-300 ml/day did not 
increase the risk of cardiovascular disease (Alexander et 
al., 2016). There is also low fat or skimmed milk and low 
fat milk products which are suitable for individuals with 
cardiovascular risk factors. Low-fat, calcium-rich dairy 
products may lower blood pressure whereas no such 
association was found with intake of high-fat dairy 
products (Hu et al., 2014; de Goede et al., 2016).  
 
Meta-analyses also support that in adults, dairy products 
facilitate weight loss and improve body composition by 
reducing body fat mass and preserving lean body mass 
during energy restriction and in short-term studies (Booth 
et al., 2015). There is increasing evidence suggesting that 
fermented milk products, cheese and yoghurt, are 
associated with a reduced risk of type 2 diabetes possibly 
due to their eff ect on the gut microbiota (Zheng et al., 
2015).  The World Cancer Research Fund (WCRF) and the 
latest meta-analyses reported that consumption of milk 
and milk products may protect against several types of 
cancers including colorectal and breast cancers (WCRF/ 
AICR, 2011; Ralston et al., 2014). Additionally, the highest 
level of milk product consumption among Asians (400-600 
g/day) was associated with a reduced risk of breast 
cancer by 6-10% compared to intakes of < 400 g/day 
(Zang et al., 2015) 
 
 
8.4. Current status 
 
Milk consumption in developing countries have been 
changing over the years. Countries like China and India, 
which are with large populations, have seen an increase 
trend of milk intake from 1970s to 2008 (Wiley, 2011). In 
India, milk and dairy products are the second most 
consumed based on the consumer food expenditure. 
Similar trend was observed in China, whereby with rising 
income, demand for dairy products continues to rise 
(Ohlan, 2016). However, while the trend is increasing, 
based on their country guidelines, recommendations are 
still not met. On the other hand, European countries and 
the United States of America showed that their population 
were able to fulﬁll the required recommendations.  
 
In Malaysia, Malaysian Adult Nutrition Survey (MANS, 
2014) reported food consumption using a semi-
quantitative food frequency questionnaire (FFQ) that 
consist of 126 food items (IPH, 2014). It was reported that 
only 24% of adults met the recommendation for milk and 
dairy products intake daily (Mohamad Hasnan et al., 
2015). Although there is an increase compared to MANS 
2003, milk consumption was not listed in the top ten 
beverage consumed daily in the recent MANS study 
(2014). However, condensed milk was ranked sixth in the 
top ten list as most consumed foods. In a span of 11 years, 
there appears a drop in powdered milk consumption from 
17% to 10% (Kasim et al., 2018).  Prevalence of  the 
consumption of milk and its products is highest with 
commercial milk (29.6%), followed by powder milk 
(19.8%), yoghurt (17.1%) and ﬁ nally, fresh milk (7.2%). 
Condensed milk had the highest prevalence (51%), 
however, this is not considered milk intake as condensed 
milk is added with high sugar levels and used 
alternatively for sugar in dessert, beverage or food 
preparation. In terms of quantity of consumption per day, 
the average intake was highest in commercial milk with 
26.79 g/day. Yoghurt, fresh milk and powdered milk had 
an average consumption of 6.6 g/day, 5.2 g/day and 2.8 
g/day, respectively.  
 
Meanwhile for children, SEANUTS study reported that 
children aged 7-12 years old did not meet daily dietary 
intake of milk/ dairy products (Koo et al., 2016). It is 
especially important to establish the habit of drinking milk 
in young children, as those who consume milk at an early 
age are more likely to do so as adults. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

137Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
8.5 Key Recommendations  
 
Key Recommendation 1 
 
Consume milk and milk products daily.  
 
How to Achieve  
 
1. Consume 1 to 2 servings of milk and milk products daily. 
 
2.
Drink milk at breakfast and/ or before bedtime. 
 
3. Drink unﬂavored milk instead of ﬂavored milk. 
 
4. Consume milk or milk products between main meals. 
 
5. Drink skimmed milk or low fat milk if you need to reduce calorie intake. 
 
 
Key Recommendation 2 
 
Replace sweetened condensed milk, sweetened condensed 
ﬁlled milk and sweetened creamer with plain milk 
liquid or powdered milk or evaporated milk in beverages and cooking. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. Use plain milk (liquid or powdered milk) instead of sweetened condensed milk. 
 
2.
Replace sweetened non-milk sources with plain milk or milk powder in beverages, eg., teh tarik, coffee 
and malt drinks. 
 
3. Use milk or milk products as part of ingredients of dishes and beverages. 
 
4. Add milk or milk products to meals like oatmeal, cereal and puddings. 
 
Additional recommendation: Lactose intolerance 
 
Lactose intolerance persons may also derive the health beneﬁ ts associated with milk and milk products by 
consuming lactose-free predigested milk. They can choose predigested milk products such as yoghurt and 
consume more calcium forti
ﬁed or enriched milk products to meet their calcium requirement. 
 

138 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
8.6 References 
 
Alexander DD, Bylsma LC, Vargas AJ, Cohen SS, Doucette A, Mohamed M, Irvin SR, Miller PE, Watson H & Fryzek 
JP (2016). Dairy consumption and CVD: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Nutr. 115(4):737-50.  
 
Booth AO, Huggins CE, Wattanapenpaiboon N & Nowson CA (2015). Effect of increasing dietary calcium through 
supplements and dairy food on body weight and body composition: A meta-analysis of randomised 
controlled trials. Br J Nutr 114(7):1013-1025. 
 
De Goede J, Soedamah-Muthu SS, Pan A, Gijsbers L & Geleijnse JM (2016). Dairy consumption and risk of stroke: 
A systematic review and updated doseresponse meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. J Am Heart 
Assoc  5(5):e002787. doi: . 
 
Hodges JK, Cao S, Cladis DP & Weaver CM (2019). Lactose intolerance and bone health: The challenge of 
ensuring adequate calcium intake. Nutrients 11(4):718.  
 
Hu D, Huang J, Wang Y, Zhang D & Qu Y (2014). Dairy foods and risk of stroke: A meta-analysis of prospective 
cohort studies. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis  24(5):460-469.  
 
Kasim NM, Ahmad MH, Baharudin @ Shaharudin A, Naidu B, Ying C, Tahir H & Aris B. (2018). Food choices 
among Malaysian adults: Findings from Malaysian Adults Nutrition Survey (MANS) 2003 and MANS 
2014. Mal J Nutr 24(1):63-75. 
 
Keller MD, Shuker M, Heimall J & Cianferoni A (2012). Severe malnutrition resulting from use of rice milk in food 
elimination diets for atopic dermatitis. Isr Med Assoc J 14(1): 40-42. 
 
Koo HC, Poh BK, Lee ST, Chong KH, Bragt MCE & Abd Talib R (2016). Are Malaysian children achieving dietary 
guideline recommendations? Asia Pac J Public Health 28(5 suppl):8S-20S. doi: 
10.1177/1010539516641504. 
 
IPH (2014). The National Health and Morbidity Survey 2014: Malaysian Adult Nutrition Survey (MANS) Vol II 
Survey Findings. Institute for Public Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
MOH (1985). Food Regulations 1985. Ministry of Health Malaysia. 
 
Mohamad Hasnan A, Khoo YY, Yusuf S & Foo LH (2015). Food intake among Malaysian adults: Are we meeting 
individualised recommendations? MJM 70(Suppl 1).  
 
Ohlan R (2016). Dairy economy of India: Structural changes in consumption and production. South Asia Res 
36(2):241-260. doi: 10.1177/0262728016638731. 
 
Ralston RA, Truby H, Palermo CE & Walker KZ (2014). Colorectal cancer and nonfermented milk, solid cheese, 
and fermented milk consumption: A systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies. Crit Rev 
Food Sci Nutr  54(9):1167-1179.  
 
Rizzoli R (2014). Dairy products, yogurts, and bone health. Am J Clin Nutr 99(5 Suppl):1256S-62S. 
 
Thorning TK, Raben A, Tholstrup T, Soedamah-Muthu SS, Givens I & Astrup A  (2016). Milk and dairy products: 
Good or bad for human health? An assessment of the totality of scientiﬁ c evidence. Food Nutr Res 
60:32527. doi:10.3402/fnr.v60.32527. 
 
Walters M E, Esfandi R & Tsopmo A (2018). Potential of food hydrolyzed proteins and peptides to chelate iron 
or calcium and enhance their absorption. Foods (Basel, Switzerland) 7(10):172.  
 
Wiley AS (2011). Milk for “growth”: Global and local meanings of milk consumption in China, India, and the 
United States. Food Foodways 19(1):11-33. doi:  
 
WCRF/ AICR (World Cancer Research Fund/ American Institute for Cancer Research) (2011). Food, Nutrition, 
Physical Activity, and the Prevention of Colorectal Cancer. WCRF International, London, UK. 
 
Zang J, Shen M, Du S, Chen T, Zou S (2015). The association between dairy intake and breast cancer in western 
and Asian populations: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Breast Cancer 18(4):313-322. 
 
Zheng H, Dietrich C, Thompson CL, Meuser K & Brune A (2015). Population structure of Endomicrobia in single 
host cells of termite gut ﬂ agellates (T richonympha spp
 .) Microbes Environ 30(1):92-98. Doi: 
10.1264/jsme2.ME14169. 
139Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
KEY 
MESSAGE
9
Reduce intake of foods high in 
fat and limit saturated fat 
intake
140 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
9.1 Terminology 
Dietary fat classiﬁcation 
 
Chemically, dietary fats are composed of 3 fatty 
acids attached to a glycerol backbone
.  These fatty 
acids are built on carbon chains (C) of varying 
length with either shared bonding (unsaturation) 
denoted chemically as CX: 1/2/3 or single-bonding 
(saturation) denoted chemically as CX: 0. 
 
Natural vegetable-based oils and fats and animal-
based fats contain varying proportions of saturated 
(SFA), polyunsaturated (PUFA) and 
monounsaturated (MUFA) fatty acids. 
 
Oils and fats 
 
Humans consume fats as visible and invisible fats. 
Visible fats come from cooking oils that are plant-
based (vegetable oils) and table spreads,
 which 
may be either plant- (margarine) or animal- (butter) 
based fats. Invisible fats are natural constituents 
of foods ranging from cereals, vegetables, fruits, 
pulses, nuts and oilseeds, dairy products, meat, 
eggs or ﬁsh.  
 
 
Saturated fatty acids 
 
Saturated fatty acids (SFAs) common to the human 
diet are built of 12 to 18 carbon-chain lengths, 
namely lauric acid (C12:0),
 myristic acid (C14:0), 
palmitic acid (C16:0) and stearic acid (C18:0).  
 
Unsaturated fatty acids 
 
There are two types of unsaturated fatty acids, 
namely monounsaturated fatty acids (MUF
A) and 
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA). The 
predominant MUFA in the diet is oleic acid (C18:1) 
whilst the PUFA consists of two groups, the 
omega-3 fatty acid [e.g., alpha-linolenic acid (ALA, 
C18:3), eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA, C20:5) and 
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, C22:6)] and the 
omega-6 fatty acid [e.g., linoleic acid (LA, C18:2) 
and arachidonic acid (AA, C20:4)]. LA and ALA are 
known as essential fatty acids (EFA) as they 
cannot be synthesised by humans and therefore 
must be included in the diet.  
 
 
 
 
99
KEY MESSAGE
REDUCE INTAKE OF FOODS 
HIGH IN FAT AND LIMIT 
SATURATED FAT INTAKE
Prof. Dr. Tilakavati Karupaiah, Dr. Khor Ban Hock, Assoc. Prof. Dr. Razif Shahril,  
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Zulfitri Azuan Mat Daud, Dr. Shanti Krishnasamy and Ms. Nur Amalina Muhamad
141Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Trans fatty acids 
 
Trans fatty acids (TFAs) are produced industrially 
through partial hydrogenation of liquid plant oils 
to become solid fats. Elaidic acid (C18:1 trans-9), a 
common industrial 
TFA is produced during 
formulation of margarines, vanaspati (vegetable 
ghee), shortenings and bakery products. Naturally 
occurring TFAs also occur as vaccenic acid (C18:1 
trans-11) in the stomach of dairy cattle. 
 
 
 
Thermally oxidised fats 
 
Lipid oxidation occurs when cooking oils are 
repeatedly reheated for deep-frying of foods. High 
temperature cooking of reused oil generates lipid 
peroxidation products. 
 
Blended oils 
 
Blending of two oils to achieve SFA:PUFA balance 
requires mixing proportionate volumes of palm oil 
and a LA-rich oil such as corn oil,
 soybean oil or 
sunﬂower oil. 
9.2 Introduction  
Fat is an essential nutrient in the human diet because of 
its energy density, as well as its requirement for 
physiological function, growth and development. Firstly, 
one gram of any fat yields 9 kcal which is double the yield 
of one gram of protein or carbohydrate. The second 
aspect, and crucial to domestic and commercial 
utilization, is that fat imparts taste, ﬂavour and texture to 
food. At a deeper level, dietary fat aids the digestion, 
absorption and transport of fat-soluble vitamins and fat-
soluble phytonutrients, such as carotenoids and 
lycopenes. During digestion, dietary fat depresses gastric 
secretions, slows gastric emptying and stimulates biliary 
and pancreatic secretions, thereby aiding the digestive 
process. Excess fat is stored as adipose tissue, which 
enables human survival during limited food availability. 
Fat also functions structurally to support organs in 
position and insulate nerves, protect the body from 
mechanical pressure and insulate the body to preserve 
body heat and temperature. 
 
Vegetable-based oils and fats, and animal-based fats such 
as butter contain varying proportions of saturated (SFA), 
polyunsaturated (PUFA) and monounsaturated (MUFA) 
fatty acids, either naturally occurring or as commercially 
blended oils and fats (Karupaiah, Noor & Sundram, 2005). 
Palm oil or palm olein has an almost equal amount of 
saturated and unsaturated fatty acids as indicated by 40% 
of palmitic acid (C16:0), 4% of stearic acid (C18:0) and 43% 
of oleic acid (C18:1). Coconut oil is one of the major 
sources of SFA in the Malaysian diet as santan is 
commonly used in preparing meals. For instance, nasi 
lemak, curry, masak lemak, kuih-muih and cendol are 
traditionally consumed foods that use santan. Santan 
contains 92% of SFA with the major fatty acids being 
lauric acid (C12:0) and myristic acid (C14:0). Soybean, 
corn, sunﬂower and safflower oils are the main sources of 
the omega-6 fatty acids, namely LA (C18:2). Omega-3 
fatty acids include the marine-based fatty acids such as 
eicosapentaenoic (EPA, C20:5) and docosahexaenoic 
(DHA, C22:6) acids as well as plant-based alpha-linolenic 
acid (ALA, C18:3). The types of ﬁsh rich in EPA and DHA 
commonly consumed by Malaysians are Indian mackerel 
(kembung), anchovies (bilis), yellow-tail and yellow-stripe 
scards (pelata), tuna (tongkol), sardines (sardin), torpedo 
scads (cencaru), Indian and short-ﬁ n scads (selayang), 
pomfret (bawal), red snapper (merah), king mackerel 
(tenggiri), marine catﬁ sh (jahan) and stingray (pari) 
(Ahmad et al., 2016). ALA is found in soybean and canola 
oils; seeds and nuts such as ﬂaxseed, chia, and walnuts; 
and some green leafy vegetables such as kale and 
spinach. Oleic acid (C18:1) is the main MUFA and found 
mainly in olive, peanut, canola and palm oil/ olein.  
 
The fatty acid composition of various dietary fats and oils 
is provided in Table 9.1. Signiﬁ cant fat content 
distribution of various food categories in terms of total fat 
and fatty acid classes are provided in Table 9.2 and Table 
9.3 provides the overall varying distribution of total fat in 
local ﬁsh with omega-3 fatty acid distribution.  
 
142 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
9.3 Scientiﬁc basis 
 
The fat guideline for a population is related to the risk 
associated with excessive consumption. Firstly, 
cardiovascular disease (CVD) constitutes the largest 
contributor to non-communicable disease-linked 
mortality in Malaysia. In 2016 alone, 74% of premature 
mortality (n = 113,400 cases) in Malaysia was attributed to 
non-communicable diseases with a proportional mortality 
of 35% alone contributed by CVD (WHO, 2018). Large 
population surveys, the Malaysian Cohort and the 
National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS) 2019 
indicate between 38.1 to 47.7% of Malaysian adults were 
hypercholesterolemic (Jamal et al., 2014; IPH, 2020). 
Hypercholesterolemia is a strong risk factor in the 
aetiology of CVD via atherogenesis, and diets high in 
saturated fats are causative of high blood cholesterol 
levels.   
 
Secondly, obesity is a concern in the Malaysian adult 
population and excess consumption of calories from 
energy-dense foods is a dietary risk factor. According to 
the NHMS 2019, obese Malaysians make up 19.7% of the 
population while those categorised as overweight make 
up 30.4% (IPH, 2020). Despite the overwhelming tendency 
to associate obesity with higher fat intake, conclusive 
association between obesity and fat intake in the 
Malaysian population is not evident. The recent Malaysia 
Lipid Study data provided evidence that there is risk to 
cardiometabolic health associated with consumption of 
a high carbohydrate with high fat diet (Karupaiah et al., 
2019).  
 
The diversity and functionality of fats depends on fatty 
acids that are either saturated or unsaturated, and this 
nature together with carbon chain length determines 
health risk (Karupaiah, Noor & Sundram, 2005). SFAs are 
hypercholesterolaemic whilst PUFAs when substituted 
for SFAs are effective in lowering blood cholesterol levels 
(Mensink, 2016). 
 
 
 
 
9.3.1 Total daily fat recommendation  
 
Total daily dietary fat intake for Malaysians (n = 2973) 
indicates median consumption levels below 30% 
TEI (IPH, 
2014). Subset of this data (n = 1080) removing under and 
over reporters indicated 31% TEI with fat consumption 
(Zainuddin et al., 2019). In line with this and global 
recommendations (FAO/ WHO, 2008), the Recommended 
Nutrient Intake (RNI) 2017 has set fat intake for 
Malaysians from 25 to 30% TEI with an upper limit of 35% 
TEI for active adults (NCCFN, 2017). Limiting dietary fat 
intake below 25% TEI would be likely to increase the 
carbohydrate load (Appel et al., 2005; Siri-Tarino et al., 
2010) which increases CVD risk. 
 
Epidemiological data suggests that there is no positive 
association between total dietary fat intake and CVD risk 
(Zhu, Bo & Liu, 2019). A reduction of total fat intake had no 
effect on CVD risk (Skeaff  & Miller, 2009). Lowering fat 
intake and increasing carbohydrate intake also increases 
coronary events (Jakobsen et al., 2009).  
 
 
9.3.1.1 Practice implications to diet  
 
Fat is an essential nutrient and its dietary level should not 
fall too low
. Otherwise the prepared diet becomes 
monotonous, has low palatability, low energy density and 
the amount of essential fatty acid (EFA) can become 
limiting for health. However, the quality of fat in the diet 
bears diff erent health implications which will be 
addressed separately in the following sections. 
 
 
9.3.2 Rationale to limit SFA consumption  
 
Saturated fatty acids (SFA) are hypercholesterolaemic 
(Mensink,
 2016). The rationale to limit SFA intake is 
primarily based on the evidence that SFA increases blood 
LDL-cholesterol (LDL-C) levels and high LDL-C has been 
associated with increased CVD risk (Ference et al., 2017). 
Reduction of SFA to < 10% TEI in the diet has been 
recommended for the Malaysian population (NCCFN, 
2017) and requires replacement with PUFA and MUFA.  
143Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
 
Nevertheless, the role of SFA in view of CVD risk remains 
inconclusive. A higher SFA intake is not found to be 
signiﬁcantly associated with increased CVD risk as 
shown in meta-analyses (Mente et al., 2009; Siri-Tarino et 
al., 2010; Chowdhury et al., 2014; de Souza et al., 2015). 
Mente et al. (2009) found a marginally signiﬁ cant 
association between SFA intake and CVD risk when 
including both genders in the analysis, whereas SFA 
consumption within populations irrespective of gender 
have not been associated with CVD risk in another meta-
analyses (Chowdhury et al., 2014). It is also noted that no 
association with all cause CVD incidence and mortality 
has been linked to SFA intake (de Souza et al., 2015). 
Contrarily, a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials 
showed that SFA reduction lowered the risk of combined 
CVD events by 21% (Hooper et al., 2020). Despite the 
inconsistent evidence on the association between SFA 
and CVD risk, it is recognized that healthy dietary 
patterns that are associated with lower CVD risk are 
typically not high in SFA content (< 10% TEI) (Krauss & 
Kris-Etherton, 2020). An urban population study in the 
Klang Valley showed that for this predominantly palm oil 
consuming adults (83.9%) daily SFA intake was reaching 
14.1% TEI (Karupaiah et al., 2019). However a dietary 
pattern analyses for this population revealed atherogenic 
risk was least with adults consuming healthy dietary 
patterns despite majorly (83.9%) consuming palm oil 
(Balasubramaniam et al., 2020). 
 
In the context of palm oil consumption link to risk of CVD 
outcomes or mortality, Ismail et al. (2018) could not 
establish strong evidence in a systematic review. A recent 
network meta-analysis comparing the effects of different 
oils and solid fats on blood lipids concluded that 
unsaturated fatty rich oils such as saffl ower, sunﬂower, 
corn, olive, soybean, palm and coconut oils were more 
effective in reducing LDL-C than highly saturated solid 
fats such as butter or lard (Schwingshackl et al., 2018).  
  
 
9.3.2.1 Practice implications to diet  
 
The recommendation to limit SFAs are in view of its LDL-
C raising e
ffects. Animal fat and full cream dairy products 
contain substantial amount of SFA and therefore should 
be targeted for reduction along with replacing some SFA 
calories with PUFA by blending palm oil with a omega-6 
PUFA oil.  
 
 
9.3.3 Rationale to increase PUFA consumption 
 
There is ample evidence to show that partially replacing 
SFA calories with PUF
A is associated with reduced risk 
of CVD (Li et al., 2015; Sacks et al., 2017). The favourable 
effects of PUFA consumption on blood lipid proﬁ le are 
viewed as a beneﬁt in CVD risk reduction (NCCFN, 2017; 
Sacks et al., 2017). The omega-6 PUFA, mainly LA, is 
hypocholesterolaemic (Karupaiah, Noor & Sundram, 2005) 
while the omega-3 PUFA family has a 
hypotriglyceridemic eff ect, which is useful to off set 
dyslipidaemia in a metabolic syndrome-prone population. 
 
 
Omega-6 fatty acids  
 
Safflower,
 sunﬂ ower, corn and soybean oils have a 
pronounced effect on LDL-C reduction compared to olive 
and palm oils (Schwingshackl et al., 2018). Based on a 
meta-analysis (cohort = 6; total n = 169,935) by 
Chowdhury et al. (2014), total dietary omega-6 fatty acid 
intake was not associated with CVD risk. However, 
another meta-analysis (cohort = 13; total n = 310,602) by 
Farvid et al. (2014) showed that greater dietary LA was 
associated with lower risk of CVD events and death. In 
terms of the eff ect of dietary omega-6 fatty acid and 
stroke risk, two prospective cohorts reported that dietary 
PUFA intake was not associated with development of 
stroke (Gillman et al., 1997; He et al., 2003). 
 
Omega-3 fatty acids 
 
The evidence on ALA intake and CVD risk remains 
inconsistent as two meta-analyses showed that dietary 
ALA intakes were not associated with CVD risk (Mente et 
al.,
 2009; Chowdhury et al., 2014), while another meta-
analysis found that higher dietary ALA intake reduced 
CVD mortality but had no e ffect on CVD events (Pan et 
al., 2012). Contrarily, robust ﬁndings have been reported 
for dietary marine omega-3 PUFA, namely EPA and DHA. 
Three meta-analyses have consistently shown that higher 
dietary marine omega-3 fatty acid intakes reduced CVD 
risk (Mente et al., 2009; Chowdhury et al., 2014; Alexander 
et al., 2017). 
 
Although the meta-analysis by Chowdhury et al. (2012) 
also reported lack of association between marine omega-
3 fatty acid intakes and stroke risk, it was observed that 
ﬁsh consumption of 2 to 4 servings a week was associated 
with lower risk of stroke. 
 
 
9.3.3.1 Practice implications to diet  
 
High LA concentrations are found in speciﬁ c vegetable 
oils whereas omega-3 PUFA is mainly from 
ﬁsh in the 
Malaysian diet (Tables 9.1 and 9.3). 
 
 
9.3.4 EFAs and minimum requirement  
 
The human body cannot synthesize LA and ALA,
 and 
minimum levels of these fatty acids are essential to 
prevent deﬁciency. The minimum requirement for EFA to 
prevent deﬁciency is about 3% TEI (2.5% TEI from LA + 
0.5% TEI from ALA) as per the FAO and RNI 
recommendations (FAO, 2010; NCCFN, 2017). Clinical 
symptoms of EFA (LA and ALA) deﬁ ciency include 
growth retardation, skin lesions, reproductive failure, and 
fatty liver. EFA deﬁ ciency is rare and usually occurs in 
individuals with liver disease or malnutrition related to 
chronic disease conditions where blood levels of EFAs are 
low (Jeejeebhoy, Detsky & Baker, 1990). Fat-free diets are 
noted to lead to clinical EFA deﬁciency symptoms such as 
marked weight loss, dryness of the skin and atopic 
eczema and eventually death (Guarnieri & Johnson, 1970; 
Holman, 1971). 
144 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
9.3.4.1 Practice implications to diet  
 
Achieving a minimum 3% TEI for a 2000 kcal diet requires 
5 to 6 g of LA and 1 g of 
ALA. Plant-based foods and seed 
oils contain both LA and ALA such as canola oil, soybean, 
soybean oil, saffl ower and sunﬂ ower oil (Table 1). In 
addition, salad dressings and spreads made from PUFA-
rich oil can also be a source of both ALA and LA (Indahl 
et al., 1999; Karupaiah et al., 2016). 
 
 
9.3.5 Maintain MUFA intake 
 
MUFA intake as it has a neutral effect on blood cholesterol 
levels (Mensink 
et al., 2003) and therefore the 
recommendation for Malaysians is to maintain MUFA 
intake. A network meta-analyses comparative found olive 
oil and palm oil to have equal treatment effects on LDL-C 
lowering (Schwingshackl et al., 2018). A meta-analysis by 
Chowdhury et al. (2014) indicated that MUFA intake did 
not affect CVD outcomes. In contrast, the Mente et al. 
(2009) meta-analysis found a signiﬁ cant inverse 
association between MUFA intake and CVD risk in men, 
but not in women. A systematic review and meta-analysis 
of 32 cohort studies (n = 841,211 subjects) (Schwingshackl 
& Hoffmann, 2014) comparing the highest to the lowest 
tertiles of MUFA consumption from olive oil with 
determined oleic acid as well as MUFA:SFA ratio, 
concluded that increased MUFA intake resulted in a 
signiﬁcant risk reduction for CVD mortality, CVD events 
and stroke. Subgroup analyses showed that only olive oil 
had a signiﬁcant inverse correlation with CVD events and 
stroke, whereas oleic acid or increased MUFA:SFA ratio 
carried no observed effect on CVD events and stroke.  
 
 
9.3.5.1 Practice implications to diet  
 
MUFA intake is not a critical issue in the Malaysian diet 
as palm oil contains MUF
A. 
 
 
 
 
9.3.6 Rationale to exclude TFA from the diet 
 
Major industrially produced TF
As in the food supply are 
elaidic acid isomers and this type of TFA is associated 
with CVD risk and mortality (Brouwer, 2016). The meta-
analysis by Chowdhury et al. (2014) which pooled 5 
observational studies on the eff ect of TFA on CVD risk, 
showed that total TFA intake was positively correlated 
with increased risk of CHD, and resulted in a 16% 
increased CVD risk. Another meta-analysis of 6 
prospective cohorts (total n = 230,135) by de Souza et al. 
(2015) found that an additional 2% TEI derived from TFA 
was associated with a 25% increased risk of CHD and 31% 
increase in CHD mortality. Pooled relative risk estimates 
in a meta-analysis of 7 cohort studies, comparing extreme 
quintiles of total-TFA intake (intake TFA ranging from 2.8 
to ~10 g/day) were 1.22 for CHD events and 1.24 for fatal 
CHD (Bendsen et al., 2011).  
 
The association of TFA consumption with stroke is not 
known for population wide studies (de Souza et al., 2015) 
but a gender effect is noted only with men (Kiage et al., 
2014) but not women (Yaemsiri et al., 2012; Kiage et al., 
2014).  
 
The WHO Expert Consultation (WHO, 2003) and the 
United States Institute of Medicine (IOM, 2005) 
recommended that the TFA content in the diet should not 
exceed 1% kcal. This upper limit for TFA in the diet was 
adopted in the RNI (NCCFN, 2017).  
 
 
9.3.6.1 Practice implications to diet  
 
The consumption of TF
A is a public health concern, 
particularly when commercially hydrogenated fats 
contribute to the bulk of dietary fat. Even then TFA intake 
will be low as palm oil is the most common edible oil used 
commercially and at home. Commercial foods are likely 
sources of trans fats, if they are imported. These may be 
stick margarines, vanaspati (vegetable ghee), partially 
hydrogenated edible oils, bakery products containing 
partially hydrogenated fats (pastries and cake) and 
cookies and biscuits (Table 9.2). 
145Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
9.3.7 Dietary cholesterol  
 
Past dietary guidelines focused on the reduction of dietary 
cholesterol intake as a strategy in reducing CVD risk 
(NCEP,
 2002; USDA, 2010). These guidelines were based 
on a positive association between high plasma total 
cholesterol and increased CVD risk, which formed the 
basis to recommend reduced dietary cholesterol 
consumption (Goodman, 1991). Nevertheless, the Finnish 
Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention 
Study reported that a higher dietary cholesterol intake did 
not associate with higher rates of CHD events and CHD 
mortality when comparing the highest (median = 768 mg) 
with the lowest (median = 390 mg) quintiles of cholesterol 
intake (Pietinen et al., 1997).  
 
The yolk of eggs is cholesterol-rich. Egg consumption is 
perceived as a health risk (NCEP, 2002; NCCFN, 2010) 
based on greater consumption been linked to higher CVD 
risk (Mann et al., 1997; Nakamura et al., 2004). An early 
meta-analysis of 22 prospective cohorts (n = 558,700 
subjects), followed between 6 to 20 years (Shin et al., 
2013), did not establish any association between egg 
consumption and CVD in a healthy population. 
Consumption was assessed in terms of ≥ 1 egg per day 
compared to < 1 egg per week. A combined prospective 
cohort study of 17 years suggested higher consumption of 
dietary cholesterol or eggs (additional 300 mg daily 
beyond 3 to 4 eggs per week) among US adults was 
signiﬁcantly associated with higher risk of incident CVD 
and all-cause mortality in a dose-response manner 
(Zhong et al., 2019). A meta-analysis based on US, 
European, and Asian cohorts showed that moderate egg 
consumption (up to one egg per day) was not associated 
with CVD risk (Drouin-Chartier et al., 2020). For patients 
with diabetes, a signiﬁ cant eff ect was noted with 
consuming ≥ 1 egg per day with increased risk of CVD 
compared to those consuming < 1 egg per week (HR = 
1.69, 95% CI = 1.09-2.62) (Shin et al., 2013). Another meta-
analysis associated consumption of ≥ 3 eggs per week 
with a signiﬁcantly higher risk for Type-2 diabetes in US 
studies, but this effect was not evident for non-US studies 
(Djousse, Khawaja & Gaziano, 2016). Based on the 
American Heart Association Guidelines 2020, healthy 
adults should be able to consume eggs with yolk in 
moderation with consumption up to one egg a day 
(Carson et al., 2020).  
 
Due to the lack of evidence from clinical studies showing 
a beneﬁt from dietary cholesterol reduction, the expert 
group for the 2015-2020 USDA dietary guideline removed 
the reduction of dietary cholesterol advisory that was in 
the previous guideline (USDA 2015). In contrast, the IOM 
advisory still advise individual to eat as little dietary 
cholesterol as possible (IOM, 2002). It is important to 
highlight that this guidelines are meant for a healthy 
population. The RNI 2017 recommends removing the 
restriction on dietary cholesterol intake for a healthy 
population but at the same time cautions against 
excessive consumption (NCCFN, 2017). It must be 
cautioned that dietary cholesterol-rich foods such as red 
meat mutton, lamb, beef and pork also carry signi ﬁcant 
content of SFA, which are known to increase LDL-C 
levels. Cholesterol, SFA, animal protein, and sodium 
coexist in foods. Dietary cholesterol content of commonly 
Malaysian foods is indicated in Figure 9.1. 
 
Practice implication  
 
Exceeding one egg a day could lead to excessive dietary 
cholesterol consumption. It must be cautioned that 
dietary cholesterol-rich foods such as red meat mutton,  
lamb
, beef and pork also carry signiﬁcant content of SFA, 
which are known to increase LDL-C levels. Cholesterol, 
SFA, animal protein, and sodium coexist in foods. Dietary 
cholesterol content of commonly Malaysian foods is 
indicated in Figure 9.1. 
 
146 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
9.4 Current status 
Visible fat consumption by Malaysians is mainly palm oil 
for cooking, as this country is a primary producer of palm 
oil. The intake of SFA for our population is expected to be 
high from palm oil consumption. Current consumption of 
palm oil is 18.5 g/capita/day (FAO, 2013). On the other 
hand, it is estimated that human consumption of LA is 
insufficient (Jakobsen et al., 2009) and therefore the public 
health approach is to encourage increasing LA 
consumption (USDA 2015; NCCFN 2017).  
 
The largest evidence on current status of fat intake comes 
from the Malaysian Adults Nutrition Survey (MANS) 2014, 
a nationwide extensive food consumption survey 
estimating the median fat intake to be 46g/day or 29% TEI 
(IPH, 2014). This intake varies between urban (median = 
49 g/day) and rural (median = 44 g/day) populations as 
well as between ethnic groups, with Chinese (median = 
53 g/day) having the highest fat intake compared to 
Malays (median = 45 g/day) and Indians (median = 47 
g/day). Fat intake is representative of various 
geographical regions in Malaysia. .  
 
In comparison with MANS data, total fat consumption in 
relation to TEI is also reported by many small population 
subgroups (Shahar et al., 2018). However due to 
heterogeneity of subject groups as per sampling, age, 
gender and dietary assessment methods, conclusive 
understanding of fat TEIs is not possible. In addition, 
reporting the distribution of SFA, PUFA and MUFA 
intakes for Malaysian healthy adults is severely limited by 
the lack of laboratory validated fatty acid compositional 
data of food intakes. However, it is noteworthy to look at 
a recent data from an urban population in Kuala Lumpur 
which reports that the intake of fat TEIs is 31.6% and this 
was distributed to SFA (14.1%), MUFA (12.6%) and PUFA 
(4.8%) (Karupaiah et al., 2019). The actual trans fat intake 
in Malaysians does not exceed the 1% TEI limitation 
because palm oil is the major edible oil used commercially 
and domestically. It was reported that 83.9% of this urban 
population uses palm oil while the remaining small 
proportion are non-users (Karupaiah et al., 2019). The 
percentage of palm oil users are expected to be higher in 
rural areas.  
 
Amongst the top ten food items by Malaysian adults (IPH, 
2014) it appears that 3.11 numbers of eggs are consumed 
weekly indicating that egg consumption is not excessive 
in the Malaysian population unlike the United States 
(Zhong et al., 2019). Consumption of marine ﬁ sh is 3.16 
(medium) servings per week.  
 
Cooking oils should ideally be consumed fresh, as 
repeated heating of these oils will generate thermally 
oxidized products (Oboh, Falade & Ademiluyi, 2014). 
Unfortunately, it is a common practice in the Malaysian 
households, as well as in commercial food production to 
use the same frying oil repeatedly to save cost (Azman et 
al., 2012). Their study found that more than half of the 100 
night-market food outlet operators in Kuala Lumpur 
(63.0%) admitted using cooking oil repeatedly for deep 
frying food and 7 of them re-used cooking oil up to four 
times or more. Another study found 43% of food operators 
in Pulau Pinang repeatedly heating cooking oil more than 
5 times or more (Aziz, Elias & Sabran, 2018). Due to 
repeated heating, the quality, colour, smell and taste of 
cooking oil changes along with oxidation of lipid content 
to lipid peroxidation products. Lipid oxidation is casually 
linked to a high risk for the development of CVD (Falade, 
Oboh & Okoh, 2017). 
 

147Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
9.5 Key Recommendations 
Key Recommendation 1 
 
Maintain total fat intake as recommended. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1.
Reduce consumption of both deep-fried 
(e.g., keropok, vadai, yue char kuay, keropok 
lekor) and batter-fried (e.g., pisang goreng, 
ﬁsh ﬁllet) foods. 
 
2. Use low-fat cooking methods such as stir-
frying, grilling, pan-frying, and air-frying.  
 
3. Modify recipes to reduce excessive use of 
oils and fats and replace it with ingredients 
with lesser fat. For example, replace santan 
with low-fat milk to prepare nasi lemak or 
reduce ghee in preparation of nasi biriyani. 
 
4. Remove excessive oil after cooking once 
the dishes are cooled to room temperature. 
For example, remove visible fat that ﬂ oats 
in soup or sambals. 
 
5. Consume less gravy that is high in fat and 
oil such as curry with coconut milk or 
masak lemak.  
 
6. Trim all visible fat of meats and remove 
chicken skin from poultry before cooking. 
 
 
Key Recommendation 2 
 
Reduce intake of foods high in saturated fats
1 such 
as butter, fatty meat, full cream milk, coconut milk, 
and coconut oil. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1.
Blend equal amount of palm oil with any 
polyunsaturated fat-rich oil (e.g., corn oil, 
soya bean oil, and sunﬂower oil) and use it 
for all types of cooking except deep-frying. 
 
2. Reduce consumption of santan-based 
foods (e.g., cendol and curry laksa) and food 
prepared with animal-based fat such as 
butter, lard, and ghee.  
 
3. Reduce consumption of full cream dairy 
products (e.g., cheese, ice cream, cream). 
 
4. Reduce consumption of processed meats 
such as nuggets, luncheon meat, and 
sausages. 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Recommendation 3 
 
Increase the intake of omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty 
acid-rich oils (i.e
., corn oil, soya bean oil, sunﬂower oil) and 
omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid-rich foods (i.e., siakap, 
cencaru, kembung, nuts, and seeds). 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1.
Blend an equal amount of palm oil with any 
omega-6 polyunsaturated fat-rich oil (e.g., corn oil, 
soya bean oil, and sunﬂower oil) and use it for all 
types of cooking except deep-frying. 
 
2. Encourage consumption of nuts (e.g., walnut, 
cashew nut, and pistachio), seeds (e.g., ﬂaxseed, 
chia seed, and sesame), and legumes (e.g., 
soybean) within the amount recommended. 
 
3. Consume at least 3 to 4 servings per week of ﬁsh 
high in omega-3 fatty acids such as siakap, 
kembung, anchovies, tenggiri, or sardines. Canned 
sources of ﬁsh (with low sodium) such as tuna and 
sardines may also be consumed. 
 
 
Key Recommendation 4 
 
Limit intake of trans fatty acids
2. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. Limit intake of shortenings and margarines
3 that 
are partially hydrogenated4. 
 
2. Read the nutritional information panel of 
processed foods for ingredients that may indicate 
trans-fat. Check the label for how much trans fat is 
stated in a product. Avoid a product with “partially 
hydrogenated fats/ oils” or “shortening” stated on 
the ingredient listing.  
 
3. Limit intake of foods made with ingredients high 
in trans fat such as shortening, vanaspati, or 
partially dehydrogenated margarine:  
 
i. Western: French fries, fast foods, and 
bakery products.  
 
ii. Local: roti canai, paratha, curry puff , 
doughnuts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
148 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Key Recommendation 5 
 
Do not reuse cooking oil more than twice. 
 
How to 
Achieve 
 
1. At home
, oils for deep-frying are not encouraged to be reused more than two times. 
 
2. Avoid purchasing deep-fried foods from outside food vendors use cooking oil repeatedly. 
 
3. Dispose household cooking oil for recycling purposes such as bio-fuels. 
 
Footnote: 
 
1 Foods high in saturated fat such as butter, full cream dairies, animal fat, and coconut milk. 
2 Trans fatty acids are produced through an industrial process that makes vegetable oils to become solid at room temperature. 
3 Shortening refers to fat that is solid at room temperature, which is commonly made from partially hydrogenation of vegetable oils. 
4 Partial hydrogenation is a chemical process of turning liquid oils into a solid form. 
 
 
 
149Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Types of fats and oils
SFA MUFA PUFA
< 12:0
Lauric acid (C12:0)
Myristic acid (C14:0)
Palmitic acid (C16:0)
Stearic acid (C18:0)
Total SFA
Palmitoleic acid 
(C16:1n7)
Oleic acid (C18:1)
Total MUFA
Linoleic acid (C18:2)
alpha-linolenic acid 
(C18:3)
Total PUFA
Others
P/S ratio
Coconut oil 14.90 48.50 17.60 8.40 2.5 91.90 - 6.50 6.50 1.50 - 1.50 0.10 0.02 
Palm kernel oil 8.20 49.60 16.00 8.00 2.40 84.20 - 13.70 13.70 2.00 - 2.00 0.10 0.02 
Cocoa butter - - 0.10 25.80 34.50 60.40 0.30 35.30 35.60 2.90 - 2.90 1.10 0.05 
Beef fat 0.10 0.10 3.30 25.50 21.60 50.60 3.40 38.70 42.10 2.20 0.60 2.80 4.60 0.06 
Shea butter - - - 5.00 41.00 46.00 - 48.00 48.00 5.10 - 5.10 0.90 0.11 
Palm oil - 0.30 0.80 39.50 4.30 44.90 0.30 43.10 43.40 10.50 0.30 10.80 0.50 0.24 
Palm olein - 0.20 0.80 37.20 4.20 42.40 0.40 43.60 44.00 11.50 0.30 11.80 0.30 0.28 
Lard 0.10 0.10 1.40 24.80 12.30 38.70 3.10 45.10 48.20 9.90 1.10 11.00 3.00 0.28 
Olive oil - - - 16.50 2.30 18.80 1.80 66.40 68.20 13.00 1.60 14.60 0.00 0.78 
Groundnut oil - - 0.04 7.50 2.10 9.60 0.10 71.10 71.20 18.20 - 18.20 0.90 1.89 
Corn oil - - - 12.30 1.90 14.20 0.10 27.70 27.80 56.10 1.00 57.10 0.90 4.02 
Soybean oil - - 0.10 10.80 3.90 14.80 0.20 23.90 24.10 52.10 7.80 59.90 1.20 4.05 
Canola oil - - - 5.60 1.80 7.40 - 56.00 56.00 25.80 9.80 35.60 1.00 4.81 
Sunflower oil - 0.02 0.09 6.20 2.80 9.10 0.12 28.00 28.10 62.20 0.16 62.40 0.40 6.85 
Safflower oil - - 0.10 6.70 2.40 9.20 0.10 11.50 11.60 79.00 0.15 79.20 0.10 8.60 
Table 9.1: Fatty acid composition of selected dietary fats and oils
Notes: values represent %/100 g edible fat. 
Sources: Kris-Etherton et al. (1988); Grundy & Denke (1990); Karupaiah, Noor & Sundram (2005); Dubois et al. (2007); Gunstone, Harwood & Dijkstra (2007) & Orsavova et al. (2015).  
150 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Table 9.2: Malaysian foods with significant content of dietary fat (g/100 g)
Food Total fat SFA MUFA PUFA TFA*
Fishes 
Black pomfret (bawal hitam) 1.79 0.94 0.14 0.71 N/A 
Giant seaperch (siakap) 2.43 1.27 0.23 0.93 N/A 
Golden snapper (jenahak) 1.02 0.42 0.09 0.51 N/A 
Indian Mackerel (kembung) 1.08 0.59 0.30 0.19 N/A 
Silver Pomfret (bawal putih) 1.60 0.88 0.15 0.57 N/A 
Yellow stripe scad (selar kuning) 2.54 0.83 0.29 1.42 N/A 
Shellfish 
Cockles (kerang) 1.65 0.64 0.40 0.61 N/A 
Cuttlefish (sotong) 1.18 0.57 0.11 0.50 N/A 
Oyster (tiram) 0.98 0.56 0.08 0.34 N/A 
Prawn (udang) 0.88 0.31 0.11 0.46 N/A 
Nuts and seeds 
Almond 48.80 4.50 33.10 11.10 N/A 
Hazelnut 61.20 4.80 50.90   5.50 N/A 
Peanut 41.80 7.60 20.70 12.90 N/A 
Walnut 53.60 7.90 0.20 45.00 N/A 
Confectionary 
Chocolate wafer 27.30 17.00 7.60 1.70 0.74 
Cooking chocolate 33.10 26.70 5.20 0.70 0.42 
Fats, oils, spreads and dressing 
Butter 80.60 46.60 25.60 4.80 1.06 
Fat spread 73.40 26.60 28.90 17.00 0.16 
Ghee 99.80 61.50 29.70  3.30 1.04 
Margarine 77.00 35.80 28.00 12.90 0.28 
Peanut butter 42.00 8.50 20.40 11.30 0.22 
Salad dressing 45.00 6.50 10.20 27.50 0.08 
Shortening 99.80 57.00 33.60 8.80 0.20 
Vanaspati 99.80 50.60 37.90 10.70 0.43 
Dairy-based products 
Adult milk powder 25.60 15.10 7.90 1.30 0.42 
Cheese 21.50 12.90 6.80 1.00 0.17 
Ice cream 11.00 7.50 2.60 0.50 0.23 
Soups 
Soup, canned 45.80 4.90 25.00 14.80 0.04 
Soup, concentrates 17.00 8.80 6.20 1.50 0.33 
151Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Table 9.2: Malaysian foods with significant content of dietary fat (g/100 g) (cont...)
Food Total fat SFA MUFA PUFA TFA*
Snacks 
French fried 2.55 1.30 0.90 0.30 0.01 
Frozen chappati/ paratha 9.10 4.70 3.10 1.10 0.06 
Frozen dough 5.50 2.70 2.10 0.70 0.02 
Potato chips 32.7 12.50 14.80 4.90 0.08 
Meat and meat products 
Beef lean 1.10 0.60 0.40 0.00 N/A 
Burger patties 13.00 5.30 5.60 1.60 0.01 
Chicken meat 19.00 5.70 9.20 4.10 N/A 
Hen egg 8.10 2.60 4.70 0.80 N/A 
Mutton 4.60 2.00 2.40 0.20 N/A 
Nuggets 15.00 6.50 6.30 2.00 0.01 
Pork fat 89.30 37.80 45.90 5.50 N/A 
Pork lean 21.00 7.90 11.00 2.10 N/A 
Prawn 0.30 0.10 0.10 0.10 N/A 
Sausages 13.80 4.30 6.30 2.90 0.02 
Popular street foods 
Char siew pau 15.4 7.20 7.00 1.20 N/A 
Chicken rice 4.60 1.80 2.10 0.70 N/A 
Curry laksa 6.40 4.40 1.40 0.60 N/A 
Dosai 0.70 0.40 0.20 0.00 N/A 
Fried kueh tiau 9.70 3.90 4.50 1.30 N/A 
Fried mee – Hokkien 6.60 2.70 3.00 0.90 N/A 
Fried mee – Indian style 9.00 5.60 2.30 1.10 N/A 
Lor mai kai 5.00 1.90 2.40 0.70 N/A 
Nasi goreng cina 13.20 5.30 6.50 1.40 N/A 
Nasi lemak 3.60 2.00 1.10 0.50 N/A 
Satay 10.80 3.60 4.60 2.60 N/A 
*relates to total TFA content as a sum of 18:1 n9t; 18:2 n6t; cis-9 t-12; t-9, cis-12; 18:3t1; 18:3t2; 18:3t4; and 18:3t5 excluding natural 
isomers of conjugated linoleic acid (cis-9,t-11); 
N/A = not available; 
Sources: Tee et al. (1997); Alasalvar et al. (2003); Dubois et al. (2007); Abd. Aziz et al. (2013); Karupaiah et al. (2014) & Orsavova et 
al. (2015).
 
152 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Sources: Rahman et al. (1995); Muhammad & Mohamad (2012).
Table 9.3: Marine omega-3 fatty acid content in Malaysian fishes
Fish species Fat  
(g per 100 g)
EPA  
(mg per 100 g)
DHA  
(mg per 100 g)
High fat fish (> 3 g fat per 100 g) 
Red pomfret (bawal merah) 34.0 2.0 1.0 
Toli shad (terubuk) 13.8 137.0 35.0 
Freshwater eel (belut air tawar) 10.7 37.0 9.0 
Jelawat (jelawat) 7.9 1.0 6.0 
Silver carp (kap perak) 7.1 2.0 6.0 
Black siapkap (siakap hitam) 6.5 3.0 25.0 
Eel (belut) 6.3 17.0 1.0 
Catfish (patin) 6.2 9.0 1.0 
Indonesian carp (tebal sisik) 5.2 1.0 0.0 
Indian mackeral (kembung) 4.5 48.0 22.0 
Wild sepat (sepat ronggeng) 4.5 2.0 7.0 
River catfish (keli bunga) 4.4 0.0 2.0 
Catfish (keli) 4.3 3.0 0.0 
Snakehead (haruan) 3.3 3.0 1.0 
Moderate fat fish (1-3 g fat per 100 g) 
Anchovies (bilis) 2.4 11.0 25.0 
African bream (tilapia) 2.8 2.0 0.0 
Red African bream (tilapia merah) 2.4 1.0 0.0 
Catla (catla) 1.9 1.0 0.0 
Big head carp (kap kepala besar) 1.8 0.0 0.0 
Rohu (rohu) 1.3 2.0 0.0 
Seamese sepat (sepat siam) 1.2 1.0 2.0 
153Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Figure 9.1. Cholesterol content of common foods  
Source: Tee et al. (1997)
Brain, ox
Hen egg, yolk
Brain, pig
Duck egg, whole
Quail egg, whole
Shrimp paste (Belacan)
Liver, farm chicken
Century egg
Fish roe, fresh
Prawn, salted, dried
Kidney, ox
Anchovy, dried, whole
Hen egg, whole
Liver, ox
Mussel, boiled
Anchovy, dried without head & entrails
Liver, pig
Butter
Gizzard, chicken
Sardine, canned
Cuttlefish, fresh
Heart, ox
Clam
Chicken, farm, tail portion
Shrimp, fermented (Cencaluk)
Snail
Prawns, fresh, without head
Chicken, farm, thigh, with skin
Jam, egg (Seri kaya)
Crab, blue
Pork, fat
Mutton, lean
Beef, lean
Prawns, fresh with head
Pork, lean
Cockles, fresh
Cheese spread, processed, cheddar
Fresh milk, UHT
Maw, ox
Duck meat, with skin
0 500
Type of food
Cholesterol content (mg/100 g)
1000 1500 2000 2500
154 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
9.6 References 
  
Abd Aziz N, Azlan A, Ismail A, Mohd Alinaﬁah S & Razman MR (2013). Quantitative determination of fatty acids 
in marine ﬁsh and shellﬁsh from warm water of Straits of Malacca for nutraceutical purposes. Biomed Res 
Int 2013:1-12. doi: 10.1155/2013/284329. 
 
Ahmad NI, Wan Mahiyuddin WR, Tengku Mohamad TR, Ling CY, Daud SF, Hussein NC, Abdullah NA, Shaharudin 
R & Sulaiman LH (2016). Fish consumption pattern among adults of di fferent ethnics in Peninsular 
Malaysia. Food Nutr Res 60(1):32697. 
 
Alasalvar C, Shahidi F, Liyanapathirana CM & Ohshima T (2003). Turkish tombul hazelnut (Corylus avellana L.). 
1. Compositional characteristics. J Agric Food Chem 51(13):3790-3796. 
 
Alexander DD, Miller PE, Van Elswyk ME, Kuratko CN & Bylsma LC (2017). A meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials and prospective cohort studies of eicosapentaenoic and docosahexaenoic long-chain 
omega-3 fatty acids and coronary heart disease risk. In Mayo Clinic Proceedings 92(1):15-29. 
 
Appel LJ, Sacks FM, Carey VJ, Obarzanek E, Swain JF, Miller ER, Conlin PR, Erlinger TP, Rosner BA, Laranjo NM 
& Charleston J (2005). Effects of protein, monounsaturated fat, and carbohydrate intake on blood pressure 
and serum lipids: Results of the Omni Heart randomized trial. JAMA 294(19):2455-2464. 
 
Aziz AA, Elias SM & Sabran MR (2018). Repeatedly heating cooking oil among food premise operators in Bukit 
Mertajam, Pulau Pinang and determination of peroxide in cooking oil. Mal J Med Health Sci 14(SP2):37-
44. 
 
Azman A, Shahrul SM, Chan SX, Noorhazliza AP, Khairunnisak M, Azlina MN, Qodriyah HM, Kamisah Y & Jaarin 
K (2012). Level of knowledge, attitude and practice of night market food outlet operators in Kuala Lumpur 
regarding the usage of repeatedly heated cooking oil. Med J Malaysia 67(1):91-101. 
 
Balasubramanian GV, Chuah KA, Khor BH, Sualeheen A, Yeak ZW, Chinna K, Sundram K & Karupaiah T (2020). 
Associations of eating mode deﬁned by dietary patterns with cardiometabolic risk factors in the Malaysia 
Lipid Study Population. Nutrients 12(7): 2080.  
 
Bendsen NT, Christensen R, Bartels EM & Astrup A (2011). Consumption of industrial and ruminant trans fatty 
acids and risk of coronary heart disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. Eur J 
Clin Nutr 65(7):773-783. doi: 10.1038/ejcn.2011.34. 
 
Brouwer IA (2016). Effect of Trans-Fatty Acid Intake on Blood Lipids and Lipoproteins: A Systematic Review and 
Meta-Regression Analysis. WHO, Geneva.  
 
Carson JAS, Lichtenstein AH, Anderson CA, Appel LJ, Kris-Etherton PM, Meyer KA, Kristina P, Tamar P & Van 
Horn L (2020). Dietary cholesterol and cardiovascular risk: A science advisory from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation 141(3):e39-e53. 
 
Chowdhury R, Stevens S, Gorman D, Pan A, Warnakula S, Chowdhury S, Ward H, Johnson L, Crowe F, Hu FB & 
Franco OH (2012). Association between ﬁsh consumption, long chain omega 3 fatty acids, and risk of 
cerebrovascular disease: Systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ  345:e6698. 
 
Chowdhury R, Warnakula S, Kunutsor S, Crowe F, Ward HA, Johnson L, Franco OH, Butterworth AS, Forouhi NG, 
Thompson SG & Khaw KT (2014). Association of dietary, circulating, and supplement fatty acids with 
coronary risk: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med 160(6):398-406. 
 
de Souza RJ, Mente A, Maroleanu A, Cozma AI, Ha V, Kishibe T, Uleryk E, Budylowski P, Schünemann H, Beyene 
J & Anand SS (2015). Intake of saturated and trans unsaturated fatty acids and risk of all cause mortality, 
cardiovascular disease, and type 2 diabetes: Systematic review and meta-analysis of observational 
studies. BMJ 351:h3978. 
 
Djousse L, Khawaja OA & Gaziano JM (2016). Egg consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes: A meta-analysis of 
prospective studies. Am J Clin Nutr 103:474-480. 
 
Drouin-Chartier JP, Chen S, Li Y, Schwab AL, Stampfer MJ, Sacks FM, Rosner B, Willett WC, Hu FB, Bhupathiraju 
SN (2020). Egg consumption and risk of cardiovascular disease: Three large prospective US cohort studies, 
systematic review, and updated meta-analysis. BMJ 368:m513.  
155Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Dubois V, Breton S, Linder M, Fanni J, Parmentier M (2007). Fatty acid proﬁles of 80 vegetable oils with regard 
to their nutritional potential. Eur J Lipid Sci Technol 109:710-732. 
 
Falade AO, Oboh G, Okoh AI (2017). Potential health implications of the consumption of thermally-oxidized 
cooking oils–A review. Pol J Food Nutr Sci 67(2):95-106. 
 
FAO/ WHO (2008). Interim Summary of Conclusions and Dietary Recommendations on Total Fat and Fatty Acids. 
FAO/WHO Expert Consultation. WHO, Geneva.  
 
FAO (2010). Fats and Fatty Acids in Human Nutrition: Report of An Expert Consultation. FAO Food and Nutrition 
Paper No. 91. Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome. 
 
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations) (2013). FAOStat. http://faostat.fao.org/  
 
Farvid MS, Ding M, Pan A, Sun Q, Chiuve SE, Steffen LM, Willett WC & Hu FB (2014). Dietary linoleic acid and 
risk of coronary heart disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. 
Circulation 130(18):1568-1578. 
 
Ference BA, Ginsberg HN, Graham I, Ray KK, Packard CJ, Bruckert E, Hegele RA, Krauss RM, Raal FJ, Schunkert 
H, Watts GF, Borén J, Fazio S, Horton JD, Masana L, Nicholls SJ, Nordestgaard BG, Sluis BVD, Taskinen MR, 
Tokgözoğlu L, Landmesser U, Laufs U, Wiklund O, Stock JK, Chapman MJ & Catapano AL (2017). Low-
density lipoproteins cause atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Evidence from genetic, epidemiologic, 
and clinical studies. A consensus statement from the European Atherosclerosis Society Consensus Panel. 
Eur Heart J 38(32):2459-2472.   
 
Gillman MW, Cupples LA, Millen BE, Ellison RC & Wolf PA (1997). Inverse association of dietary fat with 
development of ischemic stroke in men. JAMA 278(24):2145-2150. 
 
Goodman DS (1991). The National Cholesterol Education Program: Guidelines, status, and issues. Am J Med 
90:32S-35S. 
 
Grundy SM & Denke MA (1990). Dietary inﬂuences on serum lipids and lipoproteins. J Lipid Res 31:1149-1172. 
 
Guarnieri M & Johnson RM (1970). The essential fatty acids. Adv Lipid Res 8:115-174.  
 
Gunstone FD, Harwood JL & Dijkstra AJ (2007). The Lipid Handbook with CD-ROM. CRC Press, New York. 
 
He K, Merchant A, Rimm EB, Rosner BA, Stampfer MJ, Willett WC & Ascherio A (2003). Dietary fat intake and 
risk of stroke in male US healthcare professionals: 14 year prospective cohort study. BMJ 327(7418):777-
782. 
 
Holman RT (1971). Essential fatty acid deﬁciency. Prog Chem Fats Other Lipids 9:275-348. 
 
Hooper L, Martin N, Jimoh OF, Kirk C, Foster E & Abdel hamid AS (2020). Reduction in saturated fat intake for 
cardiovascular disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 5(5):CD011737. 
 
Indahl UG, Sahni NS, Kirkhus B & Naes T (1999). Multivariate strategies for classiﬁcation based on NIR spectra 
with application to mayonnaise. Chemom Intell Lab Syst 49(1):19-31. 
 
IOM (Institute of Medicine) (2002). Dietary reference intakes for energy, carbohydrate, ﬁber, fat, fatty acids, 
cholesterol, protein, and amino acids. National Academies Press 5:589-768. 
 
IOM (Institute of Medicine) (2005). Dietary reference intakes for energy, carbohydrate, ﬁber, fat, fatty acids, 
cholesterol, protein, and amino acids. National Acedemies Press 422-515. 
 
IPH (2014). The National Health and Morbidity Survey 2014: Malaysian Adult Nutrition Survey (MANS). Vol. II: 
Survey Findings. Institute for Public Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
IPH (2020). National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS) 2019. Vol. 1: NCDs – Non-Communicable Diseases: 
Risk Factors and other Health Problems. Institute of Public Health, National Institutes of Health, Ministry 
of Health Malaysia, Selangor. 
 
Ismail SR, Maarof SK, Ali SS & Ali A (2018). Systematic review of palm oil consumption and the risk of 
cardiovascular disease. PLOS One 13(2):e0193533. 
156 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Jakobsen MU, O’Reilly EJ, Heitmann BL, Pereira MA, Bälter K, Fraser GE, Goldbourt U, Hallmans G, Knekt P, Liu 
S & Pietinen P (2009). Major types of dietary fat and risk of coronary heart disease: A pooled analysis of 
11 cohort studies. Am J Clin Nutr 89(5):1425-1432. 
 
Jamal R, Syed Zakaria SZ, Kamaruddin MA, Abd Jalal N, Ismail N, Mohd Kamil N, Abdullah N, Baharudin N, 
Hussin NH, Othman H, Mahadi NM (2014). Cohort proﬁ le: The Malaysian Cohort (TMC) project: A 
prospective study of non-communicable diseases in a multi-ethnic population. Int J Epidemiol 44(2):423-
431. 
 
Jeejeebhoy KN, Detsky AS & Baker JP (1990). Assessment of nutritional status. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 14:193S-
196S. 
 
Karupaiah T, Noor MI & Sundram K (2005). Dietary fatty acids and their inﬂuence on blood lipids and lipoproteins. 
Healthful Lipids 171-203.  
 
Karupaiah T, Tan HK, Ong WW, Tan CH, Sundram K (2014). Trans fatty acid content in Malaysian supermarket 
foods: A ﬁeld-to-laboratory approach in assessing food risk. Food Add Contam Part A 31:1375-1384. 
 
Karupaiah T, Chuah KA, Chinna K, Matsuoka R, Masuda Y, Sundram K & Sugano M (2016). Comparing effects 
of soybean oil-and palm olein-based mayonnaise consumption on the plasma lipid and lipoprotein 
proﬁles in human subjects: A double-blind randomized controlled trial with cross-over design. Lipids 
Health dis 15(1): 131. 
 
Karupaiah T, Chuah KA, Chinna K, Pressman P, Clemens RA, Hayes AW & Sundram K (2019). A cross sectional 
study on the dietary pattern impact on cardiovascular disease biomarkers in Malaysia. Sci Rep 9 (1):1-
13. 
 
Kiage JN, Merrill PD, Judd SE, He K, Lipworth L, Cushman M, Howard VJ & Kabagambe EK (2014). Intake of trans 
fat and incidence of stroke in the REasons for Geographic And Racial Differences in Stroke (REGARDS) 
cohort. Am J Clin Nutr 99(5):1071-1076. 
 
Krauss RM & Kris-Etherton PM (2020). Public health guidelines should recommend reducing saturated fat 
consumption as much as possible: NO. Am J Clin Nutr 112(1):19-24. 
 
Kris-Etherton PM, Krummel D, Russell ME, Dreon D, Mackey S, Borchers J & Wood PD (1988). The effect of diet 
on plasma lipids, lipoproteins and coronary heart disease. J Am Diet Assoc 88:1373-1400. 
 
Li Y, Hruby A, Bernstein AM, Ley SH, Wang DD, Chiuve SE, Sampson L, Rexrode KM, Rimm EB, Willett WC & Hu 
FB (2015). Saturated fats compared with unsaturated fats and sources of carbohydrates in relation to 
risk of coronary heart disease: A prospective cohort study. J Am Coll Cardiol 66(14):1538-1548. 
 
Mann JI, Appleby PN, Key TJ & Thorogood M (1997). Dietary determinants of ischaemic heart disease in health-
conscious individuals. Heart 78(5):450-455. 
 
Mensink RP, Zock PL, Kester AD, Katan MB (2003). Effects of dietary fatty acids and carbohydrates on the ratio 
of serum total to HDL cholesterol and on serum lipids and apolipoproteins: A meta-analysis of 60 
controlled trials. Am J Clin Nutr 77(5):1146-1155. 
 
Mensink RP (2016). Effects of Saturated Fatty Acids on Serum Lipids and Lipoproteins: A Systematic Review and 
Regression Analysis. WHO, Geneva. 
 
Mente A, de Koning L, Shannon HS & Anand SS (2009). A systematic review of the evidence supporting a causal 
link between dietary factors and coronary heart disease. Arch Intern Med 169(7):659-669. 
 
Muhamad NA & Mohamad J (2012). Fatty acids composition of selected Malaysian ﬁshes. Sains Malays 41(1):81-
94. 
 
Nakamura Y, Okamura T, Tamaki S, Kadowaki T, Hayakawa T, Kita Y, Okayama A, Ueshima H  & NIPPON DATA80 
Research Group (2004). Egg consumption, serum cholesterol, and cause-speciﬁc and all-cause mortality: 
The National Integrated Project for Prospective Observation of Non-communicable Disease and Its 
Trends in the Aged, 1980 (NIPPON DATA80). Am J Clin Nutr 80(1):58-63. 
 
NCCFN (2010). Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2010. National Coordinating Committee on Food and Nutrition, 
Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
157Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
NCCFN (2017). Recommended Nutrient Intake (RNI) for Malaysian. A Report of the Technical Working Group 
on Nutritional Guidelines. National Coordinating Committee on Food and Nutrition, Ministry of Health 
Malaysia, Putrajaya.  
 
National Cholesterol Education Program (2002). Third report of the National Cholesterol Education Program 
(NCEP) expert panel on detection, evaluation, and treatment of high blood cholesterol in adults (Adult 
Treatment Panel III) ﬁnal report. Circulation 106(25):3143. 
 
Oboh G, Falade AO & Ademiluyi AO (2014). E ffect of thermal oxidation on the physico-chemical properties, 
malondialdehyde and carotenoid contents of palm oil. RIV ITAL SOSTANZE GR 91(1):59-65. 
 
Orsavova J, Misurcova L, Ambrozova JV, Vicha R & Mlcek J (2015). Fatty acids composition of vegetable oils and 
its contribution to dietary energy intake and dependence of cardiovascular mortality on dietary intake 
of fatty acids. Int J Mol Sci 16(6):12871-12890. 
 
Pan A, Chen M, Chowdhury R, Wu JH, Sun Q, Campos H, Mozaffarian D & Hu FB (2012). -Linolenic acid and risk 
of cardiovascular disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 96(6):1262-1273. 
 
Pietinen P, Ascherio A, Korhonen P, Hartman AM, Willet WC, Albanes D & Virtamo J (1997). Intake of fatty acids 
and risk of coronary heart disease in a cohort of Finnish men – The Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene 
Cancer Prevention Study. Am J Epidemiol 145:876-887. 
 
Rahman SA, Huah TS, Nassan O & Daud NM (1995). Fatty acid composition of some Malaysian freshwater ﬁsh. 
Food Chem 54(1):45-49. 
 
Sacks FM, Lichtenstein AH, Wu JH, Appel LJ, Creager MA, Kris-Etherton PM, Miller M, Rimm EB, Rudel LL, 
Robinson JG & Stone NJ (2017). Dietary fats and cardiovascular disease: A presidential advisory from the 
American Heart Association. Circulation 136(3):e1-e23. 
 
Schwingshackl L & Hoffmann G (2014). Monounsaturated fatty acids, olive oil and health status: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. Lipids Health Dis 13(1):154 
 
Schwingshackl L, Bogensberger B, Benčič A, Knüppel S, Boeing H & Hoffmann G (2018). Effects of oils and solid 
fats on blood lipids: A systematic review and network meta-analysis. J Lipid Res 59(9):1771-1782. 
 
Shahar S, Hamid Jan JM, Francisco DLR & Amarra MS (2018). Adherence of Malaysian adults’ energy and 
macronutrient intakes to national recommendations: A review and meta-analysis. Nutrients 10(11):1584. 
 
Shin JY, Xun P, Nakamura Y & He K (2013). Egg consumption in relation to risk of cardiovascular disease and 
diabetes: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 98(1):146-159. 
 
Siri-Tarino PW, Sun Q, Hu FB & Krauss RM (2010). Saturated fat, carbohydrate, and cardiovascular disease. Am 
J Clin Nutr 91(3):502-509. 
 
Skeaff CM & Miller J (2009). Dietary fat and coronary heart disease: Summary of evidence from prospective 
cohort and randomised controlled trials. Ann Nutr Metab 55(1-3):173. 
 
Tee ES, Mohd Ismail N, Mohd Nasir A & Khatijah I (1997). Nutrient Composition of Malaysian Foods. 4th ed. 
Institute for Medical Research, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
USDA (The United Stated Department of Agriculture) (2010). Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2010. U.S. 
Government, Washington, DC. 
 
USDA (The United Stated Department of Agriculture) (2015). Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2015-2020. 8th 
ed. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of Agriculture.  
 
WHO (2003). Diet, Nutrition, and the Prevention of Chronic Diseases: Report of A Joint WHO/FAO Expert 
Consultation (Vol. 916). WHO, Geneva. 
 
WHO (2018). Noncommunicable Diseases (NCD) Country Proﬁ les. 
https://www.who.int/nmh/countries/mys_en.pdf.  
 
 
 
158 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Yaemsiri S, Sen S, Tinker L, Rosamond W, WassertheilSmoller S & He K (2012). Trans fat, aspirin, and ischemic 
stroke in postmenopausal women. Ann Neurol 72(5):704-715. 
 
Zainuddin AA, Nor MM, Yusof SM, Ibrahim AIN, Aris T & Huat FL (2019). Changes in energy and nutrient intakes 
among Malaysian adults: Findings from the Malaysian Adult Nutrition Survey (MANS) 2013 and 2014. Mal 
J Nutr 25(2):273-285. 
 
Zhong VW, Van Horn L, Cornelis MC, Wilkins JT, Ning H, Carnethon MR, Greenland P, Mentz RJ, Tucker KL, 
Zhao L, Norwood AF, Lloyd-Jones DM & Allen NB (2019). Associations of dietary cholesterol or egg 
consumption with incident cardiovascular disease and mortality. JAMA 321(11):1081-1095.  
 
Zhu Y, Bo Y & Liu Y (2019). Dietary total fat, fatty acids intake, and risk of cardiovascular disease: A dose-response 
meta-analysis of cohort studies. Lipids Health Dis 18(1):9. 
 
159Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
KEY 
MESSAGE
10
healthy food
Choose and prepare foods 
with less salt, sauces and 
flavour enhancers
10.1 Terminology  
160 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Commercial edible salt 
 
There is a wide range of commercial edible salts 
in the market, i
.e., sea salt, rock salt, bamboo salt 
and pan salt. These commercial edible salts have 
different mineralities depending on their source, 
giving each one a unique ﬂ avour. However, their 
sodium content is as high as the table salt, they 
should be used with cautious similarly with the 
table salt and not exciding the daily recommended 
intake.  
 
Flavour enhancer 
 
Flavour enhancer means any substance that, 
when added to food
, is capable of enhancing or 
improving the ﬂavour of that food (MOH, 1985).  
 
Hidden salt in food 
 
A signiﬁcant amount of salt in Malaysian’s diet is 
from the processed foods even if they don’t taste 
salty. Several food additives such as sodium 
nitrate,
 sodium bicarbonate and sodium bisulfate 
are the contributors for the salt sodium content in 
processed foods.  
Iodised salt 
 
It is a form of salt that has been fortiﬁ ed with 
iodine. It shall contain not less than 25 mg/kg and 
not more than 40 mg/kg of iodide (MOH,
 1985). 
 
Low sodium food 
 
Low sodium food is deﬁ ned as a food with a 
sodium concentration not more than 0.12 g/100 g 
(solid) or 0.06 g/100 ml (liquid) (FSQD,
 2010). 
 
Natural food enhancer 
 
Any substance such as herbs and condiments, i
.e., 
garlic, onion, curry spices, white pepper, lemon 
grass, vinegar and lemon; added during food 
preparation to enhance the ﬂavour of food. 
 
Flavor enhancer 
 
Flavor enhancer means any substance that, when 
added to food
, is capable of enhancing or 
improving the ﬂavor of that food (MOH, 1985). 
 
 
1010
KEY MESSAGE
CHOOSE AND PREPARE FOODS 
WITH LESS SALT, SAUCES AND 
FLAVOUR ENHANCERS
Prof. Dr. Suzana Shahar, Assoc. Prof. Dr. Zahara Abdul Manaf, Ms. Viola Michael and  
Ms. Ainan Nasrina Ismail
161Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Very low sodium food 
 
Very low sodium food is de
ﬁned as a food with a 
sodium concentration not more than 0.04 g/100 g 
(solid) or 0.02 g/100 ml (liquid) (FSQD, 2010). 
 
Salt and sodium  
 
Salt is an inorganic compound consisting of 
sodium and chloride ions i.e
., NaCl. 1 g sodium is 
equivalent to 2.55 mg NaCl whilst 1 mmol Na is 
equivalent  to 23 mg Na (NaCl consists of Na at 
40%). Thus, 1 teaspoon or 5 g salt provides 2000 
mg or 88 mmol sodium. In addition to NaCl, 
sodium may also be present in other forms, such as 
monosodium glutamate, sodium nitrate and 
sodium benzoate. 
 
Salt substitutes   
 
It is referred to as light salts,  typically replace all 
or some of the sodium with another mineral
, such 
as potassium or magnesium.   
 
Sauce 
 
A sauce is liquid or sometimes semi solid food 
served on food as a relish (served as an 
accompaniment to food) or used as a ﬂ avourful 
seasoning in preparing other foods. This includes 
soya sauce (fermented soya beans),
 oyster sauce, 
tomato and chilli sauces, ﬁ sh sauce (made from 
fermented ﬁsh), prawn sauce (cencaluk), kicap 
sotong, teriyaki sauce and Worchester sauce.    
 
Sodium free food 
 
Sodium free food is deﬁ ned as a food with a 
sodium concentration not more than 0.005 g/100 g 
(solid) or /100 ml (liquid) (FSQD,
 2010). 
 
Table salt 
 
It is a ﬁne-grained salt that often contains an anti-
caking ingredient, such as calcium silicate
, to keep 
it free-ﬂ owing. It is available iodised or non-
iodised. This type of salt is mainly used in cooking 
and at the table. 
 
Processed Food 
 
Processed food includes food that has been 
cooked,
 canned, frozen, packaged or changed in 
nutritional composition with fortifying, preserving 
or preparing in different ways. 
 
Healthier Choice Logo (HCL) 
 
Healthier Choice Logo (HCL) is given to a food/ 
beverage product which has fulﬁlled the nutrient 
criteria set by the Ministry of Health Malaysia in 
April 2017. This logo means the product is 
healthier compared with the other products in the 
same category (MOH, 2019). 
10.2 Introduction  
 
The prevalence of high blood pressure has remained 
constant in the country in the past decades. Results from 
the National Health Morbidity Survey, indicated that the 
prevalence of hypertension among adults aged ≥ 18 years 
old and more than 30 years old increased from 32.2% and 
42.6% in 2006 (IPH, 2008) to 32.7% and 43.5% in 2011, 
respectively (IPH, 2015). However, latest ﬁ ndings from 
NHMS 2019 (IPH, 2020) showed a reduction in the 
prevelance of hypertension; with 30% of adults aged 18 
years and above reported with raised blood pressure. 
Even though there were declining trend of the prevelance 
as compared to 2011, hypertension  has been known as a 
major risk factor for cardiovascular disease and premature 
death. Heart diseases and diseases of pulmonary 
circulation and cerebrovascular diseases (23.5%) are the 
major cause of deaths in Ministry of Health hospitals. 
Based on Malaysia’s latest Burden of Disease Study, high 
blood pressure is estimated to cause 42.2% of deaths and 
21.6 % of disability-adjusted life years (DALY), the largest 
contributor for both men and women (MOH, 2015).  
 
Dietary salt has been associated with high blood pressure 
and its related co-morbidity. Therefore, reducing the 
average salt intake of the population is likely to decrease 
the health burden associated with high blood pressure 
and improve public health. Excess salt and sodium intake 
globally is associated with heart disease, stroke and 
kidney disease, and also risk of stomach cancer, 
osteoporosis and obesity (Brown et al., 2009; He, Jenner & 
Macgregor, 2010).  
 
Sodium is an essential mineral that is required daily in a 
minute amount approximately at 500 mg/day (22 
mmol/day) for adults. However, excessive intake or more 
than the Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) (2300 mg 
sodium/day or 101 mmol/day) can increase risk of adverse 
effects (IOM, 2006). Salt is the major source of sodium in 
the Malaysian diet. One teaspoon or  5 g salt provides 
2000 mg (88 mmol) sodium. However, the WHO (2012) has 
not clearly deﬁ ned the recommendation based on age 
range.   
 
Recommended Nutrient Intake for Malaysia, 2017 
(NCCFN, 2017) is in agreement with the current 
recommendation by WHO (WHO, 2012) with a maximum 
level of 2 g/day sodium for adult. The recommendation for 
children should be adjusted downward based on the 
energy requirement. Adequate Intake (AI) as suggested 
by IOM (IOM, 2006) could be referred for age speciﬁ c 
guideline. The present document has been prepared to 
review the recommendation made in the year 2010, taking 
into consideration recent evidences or recommendations 
on salt intakes in the population, for the prevention and 
control of non-communicable diseases.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
162 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
10.3 Scientiﬁc basis  
As early as the year 1994, the evidence of an association 
between dietary salt intakes and blood pressure has 
increased, with the greatest reductions in blood pressure 
observed when a diet rich in fruits, vegetables and low fat 
dairy foods and reduced in saturated and total fat, is 
combined with a low salt diet (SACN, 2003).  
 
High salt intake is associated with an increased risk of 
high blood pressure, as evidenced by a number of 
epidemiological studies. For example, the INTERSALT 
study involving 52 communities (INTERSALT 
Cooperative Group, 1988), reported a positive relationship 
between salt intake and blood pressure. The e fficacy of 
reduced sodium intake in lowering blood pressure is also 
well established. A systematic review and dose-response 
meta-analysis study by Wang et al. (2020) has found that 
the the risk of cardiovascular disease increased up to 6% 
for every 1 g increase in dietary sodium.   
 
In a Cochrane systematic review, a modest reduction in 
salt intake for four weeks or more among individuals with 
normal or elevated blood pressure had a signiﬁcant effect 
on blood pressure (He & MacGregor, 2004). A systematic 
review and meta-analysis of  randomised trials by  Huang 
et al. (2020) on the effect of dose and duration of reduction 
in dietary sodium on blood pressure levels showed that “ 
in trials of less than 15 days’ duration, each 50 mmol 
reduction in 24 hour urinary sodium excretion was 
associated with a 1.05 mmHg (0.40 to 1.70; P = 0.002) SBP 
fall, less than half the effect observed in studies of longer 
duration (2.13 mmHg; 0.85 to 3.40; P = 0.002). Otherwise, 
there was no association between trial duration and SBP 
reduction. The magnitude of blood pressure lowering 
achieved with sodium reduction showed a dose-response 
relation and was greater for older populations, non-white 
populations, and those with higher blood pressure. 
Another earlier meta-analyses by Aburto, Li & Macgregor 
(2013) involving thirtysix RCTs found that a reduction in 
sodium intake signiﬁcantly reduced resting SBP by 3.39 
mmHg and resting DBP by 1.54 mmHg. When sodium 
intake was < 5 g of salt (sodium 2000 mg) per 24 hours, 
compared with > 5 g of salt (sodium 2000 mg) per 24 
hours, SBP was decreased by 3.47 mmHg and DBP by 1.81 
mmHg. Another systematic review by Johnson et al. 
(2015) also conﬁ rmed a causal relationship between 
increasing dietary salt and increased blood pressure and 
an association between several adverse health outcomes 
and increased dietary salt. Further, an  association 
between salt intake and renal cell cancer was also found. 
Although the understanding of long term eff ects of 
reducing dietary salt intake on cardiovascular morbidity 
and mortality can be improved by further studies, the 
available scienti ﬁc evidence is strong enough to justify 
reducing sodium intake in the whole population through 
cost-effective public health approaches (WHO, 2007). 
Excessive sodium intake (exceeding 5 g/day) has also 
been associated with increased cardiovascular diseases 
other than raised blood pressure (O’Donnell et al., 2020). 
Interconnected physiological mechanisms are associated 
with increased intake of dietary salt, including ﬂuid 
homeostasis, hormonal and inﬂ ammatory pathway, as 
well as immune response and the gut microbiome (He et 
al., 2020). High salt intake has been associated with the 
gut-immune axis, thus the gut microbiome as a potential 
therapeutic target to counteract salt-sensitive conditions. 
High salt intake aff ects the gut microbiome in mice, 
particularly by depleting Lactobacillus murinus. 
Consequently, treatment of mice with L.murinus 
prevented salt-induced aggravation of actively induced 
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis and salt-
sensitive hypertension by modulating TH17 cells.  Further, 
a moderate high-salt challenge in a pilot study in humans 
163Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
reduced intestinal survival of Lactobacillus spp., 
increased TH17 cells and increased blood pressure (Wilck 
et al., 2017). 
 
The Institute of Medicine (IOM, 2006) stated an Adequate 
Intake and Tolerable Upper Level for sodium for adults 
aged 19 to 50 years as 1500 mg and 2300 mg, respectively. 
A lower recommendation but similar TUL was outlined 
for older individuals (Table 10.1). The recommendation by 
WHO (2012) of 2000 mg sodium or less than one teaspoon 
or 5 g salt or sodium chloride is adopted as a population 
nutrient intake goal for Malaysians. Although it is 
important to advise people to consume less salt and to 
choose low salt foods, the widespread use of salt in 
processed food and food prepared away from home or 
eaten outside is a major barrier to achieving any 
meaningful reduction in dietary sodium intake. Therefore, 
there is a need to reduce the salt content of processed 
food and drinks, with the co-operation of food 
manufacturers, retailers and caterers. Reformulation of 
foods high in sodium or salt has been emphasized as 
effective public health strategies to reduce salt 
consumption of the population. More recently, evidence 
on the positive effects of reformulation on consumption 
and health was found to be stronger for sodium 
interventions, less conclusive for sugar and fats (Federici 
et al., 2019). 
 
Table 10.1:  Dietary reference intakes of sodium for adults 
Age group
19-50 years 1.5 2.3 
51-70 years 1.3 2.3 
> 70 years 1.2 2.3 
Adequate  
Intake (AI) 
(milligrams/ day)1
Tolerable Upper Intake Level 
(UL) 
(milligrams/ day)2
1 AI = Adequate Intake; 2 UL = Tolerable Upper Intake Level.  Unless otherwise specified, the UL represents total 
intake from food, water, and supplements. 
Source: IOM (2006) 
Consumer should also be encouraged and educated to 
read food label and the manufacturers themselves should 
produced a consumer-friendly labelling showing the 
sodium content of food. Information on sodium content 
is now included on food labels (in terms of density or 
standard serve), but it is easy to confuse salt and sodium 
and consumers may not be aware of the deﬁ nition of a 
low salt food. The Malaysian Food Labelling Act deﬁnes a 
low salt food as a food with a sodium concentration of up 
to 120 milligrams per 100 grams (MOH, 2006). 
 
In older adults, salt has many detrimental eff ects on 
health by causing a rise in blood pressure, the 
consequence of which is cardiovascular disease (CVD), 
including strokes, heart attacks and heart failure. The risk 
of having these diseases is signi ﬁcantly increases with 
age. Furthermore, with increasing age there is also an 
increased salt sensitivity meaning that salt has a greater 
effect on blood pressure. Therefore, a reduction in salt is 
particularly important for older people even for older 
adults without high blood pressure. Osteoporosis has 
been associated with a high salt intake (Heaney, 2006). A 
high salt intake can cause calcium losses through the 
urine which can lead to bone demineralisation. It is 
believed that patients with high blood pressure excrete 
more calcium in the urine and are therefore at higher risk 
of osteoporosis. Normative changes in salt taste occur 
with aging resulting in higher thresholds of salt sensitivity 
and salt taste affinity that predispose older adults to high 
salt intake (Wessler, Hummel & Maurer, 2014).  
 
10.4 Current status 
 
The prevalence of hypertension among Malaysian remain 
30% over the last 15 years since 2006 (IPH, 2008, 2011, 
2015 & 2020). Based on the age-standardised adjusted 
estimated published by WHO, Malaysia’s prevalence of 
high BP is higher compared to neighbouring countries in 
South East Asia, ie., Singapore and Thailand. In the 
Burden of Disease Study (2014), high blood pressure is 
estimated to cause 42.2% of deaths and 21.6% of 
disability-adjusted life years (DALY) for both men and 
women (MOH, 2015). 
 
Ministry of Health Malaysia recommends that 2000 mg 
sodium per day (or 1 teaspoon or 5 g sodium chloride) as 
a population nutrient intake goal for Malaysians. This level 
was inline with the recommendation by the World Health 
Organization  (WHO, 2007 & 2012). In the year 2010, it was 
estimated that 99.2% of the world adult population 
consumed excessive amount of sodium as compared to 
WHO recommendation (Powles et al., 2013). On the other 
hand, a study conducted in Southeast Asia countries in 
2010 found that sodium intake among adults in Southeast 
Asian countries exceeded 3 g/day. Thailand showed the 
highest sodium intake among the Southeast Asian 
countries, whilst Indonesia is the lowest. Meanwhile, 
Malaysia was ranked at number 8 among all Southeast 
Asian countries. Based on gender, adult men have higher 
intake of sodium than women (Ammara & Khor, 2015). 
 
 
164 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
A cross-sectional population-based household survey, 
namely the Malaysian Community Salt Survey (MyCoSS) 
has been conducted in 2018 using 24 hours urinary 
sodium to estimate sodium intake among 960 adults aged 
18 years and above. Based on this study, it was found that 
79% of Malaysian adults consumed high sodium in their 
diet, with higher proportion of men compared to women. 
The mean 24-hour urinary sodium intake was 3167 
mg/day (95% CI = 2987-3346), which corresponds to 138 
mmol/day or 7.9 gram of salt or 1.6 teaspoon of salt (IPH, 
2019). The data from MyCoSS is higher than an early 
study among health staff  in Malaysia (MySALT) that 
reported mean sodium intake of 2860 mg/day as assessed 
using similar method, i.e., 24 hours urinary sodium 
excretion (IPH, 2016). Data obtained from dietary survey 
i.e., Malaysian Adult Nutrition Survey (MANS) showed a 
lower values, i.e., 2575 mg/day in the year 2008 and 1935 
mg/day in 2014 (Mirnalini et al., 2008; IPH, 2014). This data 
could be under reported as the gold standard for 
estimation of sodium or salt intake is the 24 hour urinary 
sodium excretion. 
 
Modern processed western foods has been introduced as 
a result of urbanisation. This has led to the increasing 
demand on salt and sodium utilisation in food supply in 
Southeast Asia countries. Sodium-containing compounds 
such as sodium benzoate, sodium nitrate and sodium 
ascorbate are being used in proccessed food (IOM, 2010). 
In both MySALT studies in 2012 and 2015, sodium intake 
among health staff found that light soya sauce was the 
most popular seasoning consumed daily which 
contributed to the highest daily sodium intake (IPH, 2015). 
The Malaysian Adult Nutrition survey (MANS) showed 
that foods sources of high sodium content mostly came 
from local kuih (79%), breads (76.9%), bihun, kueyteow, 
laksa, laksam, loh si fun (76%), ketchup (75.6%) and 
followed by mee (75.2%) (IPH, 2014).   Recent ﬁ ndings 
from MyCoSS (IPH, 2019) reported that top 10 high 
sodium food most consumed by Malaysian adults were 
fried vegetables, white/ wholemeal bread, omelette, fried 
chicken with spice, fried rice, nasi lemak, roti canai, fried 
bihun, fried noodle and chicken curry. Further, the top 10 
food items that contributed to highest sodium proportion 
intake were mee kolok/ Kampua, light soya sauce, curry 
noodle, vegetable with salted ﬁ sh, fried vegetables, roti 
canai and fried rice. 
 
It is important to note that the increased of urbanization 
is not necessarily accompanied by a shift in preference 
from traditional to western foods. It was reported that 
both home-cooked foods and foods eaten away from 
home contributed to increased sodium intake in 
Southeast Asia countries (Brown et al., 2009). For example, 
in Vietnam, consumption of streets foods showed a higher 
percentage to daily sodium intake among urban 
adolescents compared with rural adolescents (33.1 ± 2.1% 
vs. 12.1 ± 2.1%, respectively). However, rural adolescents 
had higher total sodium intakes compared with urban 
adolescents (1643.2 ± 124.8 mg Na vs. 1500.7 ± 124.8 mg 
NA, respectively) (Lachat et al., 2009). Whilst,  ﬁ ndings 
from the Singapore Chinese Health Study  found that 
respondents reporting frequent intake of Western-style 
fast food items (≥ 2 times per week) consumed more dim 
sum, noodles and sugar-sweetened beverages, and 
greater amounts of sodium (864 mg NA/1000 kcal) 
compared with those who did not eat fast food (651.7 mg 
Na/1000 kcal) (Odegaard et al., 2012). 
 

165Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
There is also a concern about consumption of processed 
and ultra processed foods among Asian population. 
Processed and ultra-processed foods still have a lower 
contribution to energy and nutrient intake in Jakarta than 
non processed foods and processed ingredients. Based 
on the Jakarta Individual Food Consumption Survey 2014 
(Setyowati et al. 2018), processed and ultra-processed 
foods still have a lower contribution to energy and 
nutrient intake than non-processed foods and processed 
ingredients. However, with respect to sodium, ultra-
processed foods contributed to the second highest 
percentage at 18.4%, after processed ingredients at 68.9%, 
as compared to non processed foods of 7.9% and 
processed foods at 4.8%. In Malaysia, an attempt has been 
conducted to determine the contribution of ultra-
processed foods on the diet of adults in Terengganu. It 
was found that the ultra processed food contributed the 
highest to sucrose (63%), followed by sodium (26%) and 
energy (24%) (Asma’ et al. 2019). 
 
Southeast Asian countries has been known to be the 
‘heaven’ of variety of foods. Salted and fermented foods 
has been part of the traditional food culture in most 
Southeast Asian countries and they are widely consumed, 
particularly among the low-income groups (Ang et al., 
1999). The process of fermentation requires large amounts 
of salt to prevent putrefaction (Lee & Kim, 2013). 
Fermented ﬁsh sauces and pastes (such as belacan) are 
prepared from different kinds of ﬁsh, shrimp and shellﬁsh. 
Salt is added and mixed, ranging from 20 to 40% for ﬁsh 
sauce and 15 to 25% for ﬁ sh pastes (Ang et al., 1999). 
Asian countries are also the largest producers and 
consumers of monosodium glutamate (Nguyen et al., 
2020), which is a ﬂ avour enhancer containing salt 
(sodium). Recently, it has been observed that Malaysians 
also favour foods from other countries such as Korean and 
Japanese foods, known to be high in salt, such as Ramen 
and dishes using salted eggs (Cho, 2010). The shift of 
dietary pattern from consuming traditional food such as 
rice with dishes to bread and pastries could also 
increased the level of sodium or salt consumption of the 
population, as evidenced in ﬁ ndings from the recent 
MyCoSS study (IPH, 2019).   
 
In the local market, there are various types of salt been 
sold. It is important to note that a new Consensus Action 
on Salt and Health (CASH) in UK survey has reported that 
all variety of salt sold in the market, either in crystals or 
grains, from the sea or from the Himalayas; contain and 
equally high sodium chloride content as table and 
cooking salt (WASH, 2017). Salt substitutes containing 
potassium chloride can be one way of reducing sodium 
intake. However, these substitutes may be harmful to 
some people with certain medical conditions such as 
kidney and heart problems. These individuals should 
consult a medical doctor before trying such salt 
substitutes. Iodised salt is one way that has been used in 
iodine deﬁciency disorder (IDD) prevention programme. 
However, the consumption of iodised salt should also be 
consumed less than one (1) level teaspoon daily. 
 
Though mandatory labelling of sodium has been gazetted 
on the 21 July 2020, and to be enforced by July 2022, 
industries should be begin to comply to the regulation 
since recent surveys indicated that almost half of one of 
the top sources of sodium in Malaysian diet, i.e.,  sauces 
did not include sodium content information on the 
nutrient information panel (Shahar et al., 2019). Similar 
trend was noted for instant noodles, of which only 62% of 
instant noodles displayed the salt content on their food 
label. Further, salt content in instant noodles is very high, 
with 90% exceeding the daily salt intake recommended 
by WHO (Tan et al., 2019). Among those processed foods 
sold in Malaysian supermarkets with sodium or salt 
labelling, the highest average salt content was gravy and 
sauce (3.97 g/100 g), followed by soup (2.95 g/100 g), 
cheese (2.14 g/100 g), meat (1.37 g/ 100 g), ﬁsh (1.25 g/100 
g), chicken (1.20 g/100 g), vegetables (1.18 g/100 g), 
cheese (2.14 g/100 g), butter and margerine (1.13 g/100 
g), breakfast cereals (0.94 g/100 g), savoury snacks (0.90 
g/100g), ﬂatbread (0.86 g/100 g), sweet snacks (0.30 g/100 
g) and potato (0.29 g/100 g). Most processed food 
products available in supermarkets were high in salt 
content and 76.5% of unlabeled processed food products 
were made in Malaysia, whilst 23.5% were imported 
(Haron et al., 2020). 
 
Sodium target has been identiﬁed through the Healthier 
Choice Logo (HCL) guideline, however, less than one-ﬁfth 
of the sauces products surveyed had salt content below 
the target for sodium of less than 4.5 g/100 g or salt of less 
than and equal to 4500 mg/100 g (Shahar et al., 2019). 
Prompt action from regulatory and health authorities is 
needed to reduce the salt content in these types of foods. 
Integrative approaches including nutrition labelling, 
voluntary  or mandatory reformulation or sodium 
reduction programmes in processed food and legislative 
sodium reduction programmes are essential to reduce the 
sodium intake in the population and further reduce the 
risk of cardiovascular disease (Hyseni et al., 2017). 
166 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
10.5 Key Recommendations 
Key Recommendation 1 
 
Limit salt intake in daily meals. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. Learn to enjoy natural 
ﬂavour of foods with 
lower level of saltiness without salt 
(including asam boi) and sauces (such as 
soya sauce, oyster sauce, tomato sauce). 
 
2. Limit the amount of salt, sauces and ﬂ avour 
enhancer [such as monosodium glutamate 
(MSG), ready-to-use paste, cubes and 
powder] in cooking. 
 
3. Limit intake of ultra-processed foods such 
as instant noodles, chicken nuggets, 
burgers, hot dogs. 
 
4. Enhance the ﬂ avour of food using natural 
herbs and condiments such as garlic, onion, 
curry spices, white pepper, lemon grass, 
vinegar and lemon. 
 
5. Reduce the amount of gravy in your meal. 
For example, consume only 2 dessert 
spoons of curry, instead of 4 dessert spoons 
of curry. 
 
6. Request for low or no added salt and 
sauces dishes when eating out. 
 
7. Inculcate low saltiness taste of food since 
childhood. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Recommendation 2 
 
Limit consumption of salty foods. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1.
Limit intake of preserved food with high-salt 
content (such as salted ﬁ sh, salted egg, salted 
vegetables and fruits pickles), high-salt snacks 
(such as salted nuts, potato crisps and ﬁsh chips), 
processed foods (such as sardines, sausages, 
chicken nuggets, meatball and burger), fast foods, 
instant noodles, instant soup and other types of 
highly seasoned foods (such as dishes made from 
salted egg powder). 
 
2. Choose foods with low salt or sodium content 
instead of medium and high sodium content 
within the same food group. For example, choose 
fresh fruits and vegetables instead of preserved 
and processed foods. Avoid consuming fruits with 
ﬂavour enhancer (such as asam boi) and dipping 
(such as soya sauce). Refer Table 10.2 as a guide. 
 
3. Soak preserved foods such as dried anchovies and 
dried prawns in water to reduce salt content. 
 
4. In the Nutrition Information Panel of food labelling, 
salt is being referred as sodium. Note the sodium 
content of a food in the Nutrition Information 
Panel, compare with other available brands of the 
same product and choose the one with the lower 
sodium content.  
 
5. Choose brands with “low” or “lower” or “less” salt 
claims on the label, if available. Use Healthier 
Choice Logo (HCL) as a guide, if available. 
 
6. Read the ingredients list on the food label and take 
note of all sources of salt, such as sodium chloride 
(NaCl), monosodium glutamate (MSG), sodium 
nitrate, sodium benzoate. Identify the position of 
sodium in the list (from the high to the lowest) and 
read the total sodium from the Nutrition 
Information Panel.  
 
167Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
10.6 References   
Aburto NJ, Li J & Macgregor GA (2013). Eff ect of lower sodium intake on health: Systematic review and 
metaanalyses. BMJ 4:CD004937. 
 
Ammara MS & Khor GL (2015). Sodium consumption in Southeast Asia: An updated review of intake levels and 
dietary sources in six countries. In: Bendich A., Deckelbaum R. (Eds.). Preventive Nutrition. Nutrition 
and Health. Springer, Cham.  
 
Ang CYW, Liu K & Huang YW (Eds.) (1999). Asian Foods: Science and Technology. Technomic Publishing 
Company, Lancaster. 
 
Asma’ A, Lokman N.A.H, Hayati M.Y, Zainuddin A.A. 2019. Ultra-Processed Food Classi ﬁcation, their 
Contribution to Sodium and Added Sugar Availability, and its Relationship with Nutritional Status among 
Adults in Terengganu, Malaysia. IIUM Medical Journal Malaysia; 18(3): 49-58. 
 
Brown IJ, Tzoulaki I, Candelas V & Elliot P (2009). Salt intakes around the world: Implications for public health. 
Internat J  Epidemio 38:791-813. 
 
Cho C (2010). Korean wave in Malaysia and changes of the Korean – Malaysia relations. Mal J  Media Studies 
12:1-14. 
 
Federici C, Detzel P, Petracca F, Dainelli D & Fattore G  (2019). The impact of food reformulation on nutrient 
intakes and health, a systematic review of modelling studies. BMC Nutr 5:2.  
 
He FJ, Tan M, Ma Y &  MacGregor GA (2020). Salt reduction to prevent hypertension and  cardiovascular disease: 
JACC State-of-the art Review.  J Am College Cardiology 75(6):632-647. 
 
FSQD  (2010). Guide to Nutrition Labeling and Claims as at December 2010. Food Safety & Quality Division, 
Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
 
Haron H, Hiew I, Shahar S, Micheal V & Ambak R (2020). A survey on salt content labelling of the processed food 
available in Malaysia. Int J Environ Res Public Health 17(7):2469. doi:  
 
He FJ & MacGregor GA (2004). Eff ect of longer-term modest salt reduction on blood pressure. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 4. 
 
He FJ, Jenner KH & Macgregor GA (2010). WASH-world action on salt and health. Kidney Int 78:745-753.  
 
Heaney RP (2006). Role of dietary sodium in osteoporosis. J Am Coll Nutr 25(Suppl 3): 271S-276S. 
 
Holland B, Welch AA, Unwin ID, Buss DH, Paul AA & Southgate DAT (1992).  McCance and Widdowson’s – The 
Composition of Foods. 5th ed. The Royal Society of Chemistry and Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries & 
Food, UK. 
 
Huang L, Trieu K, Yoshimura S, Neal B, Woodward M, Campbell NRC, Li Q., Lackland DT, Leung AA, Anderson 
CAM, MacGregor GAM & He FJ (2020). Effect of dose and duration of reduction in dietary sodium on 
blood pressure levels: Systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised trials. BMJ 368:m315.  
doi:   
 
Hyseni L, Elliot-Green A, Lloyd-Williams F, Kypridemos C, O'Flaherty M, Mc Grill R, Orton L, Bromley H, 
Cappuccio FP & Capewell (2017). Systematic review of dietary salt reduction policies: Evidence for an 
effectiveness hierarcy? PLOS One 12(5):e0177535..  
 
INTERSALT Cooperative Research Group (1988). Intersalt: An international study of electrolyte excretion and 
blood pressure.  Results for 24 hour urinary sodium and  
potassium excretion.  BMJ 297:319-328. 
 
IOM (2006). Dietary Reference Intakes: The Essential Guide to Nutrient Requirements. Institute of Medicine, 
National Academy of Sciences, Washington D.C. 
 
IOM (2010). Strategies to Reduce Sodium Intake in the United States. Institute of Medicine, National Academic 
Press, Washington, DC. 
 
168 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
IPH (2008). The Third National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS III) 2006. Vol 2. Institute for Public Health, 
Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
IPH (2011). The National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS 2011). Vol. II: Non-Communicable Diseases. 
Institute for Public Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
IPH (2014). The National Health and Morbidity Survey 2014: Malaysian Adult Nutrition Survey (MANS). Institute 
for Public Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
IPH (2015). The National Health and Morbidity Survey 2015. Vol. II: Non-communicable Diseases, Risk Factors 
& Other Health Problems. Institute of Public Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
IPH (2019). Population-based salt intake survey to support the national salt reduction programme for Malaysia 
(Malaysia Community Salt Study – MyCoSS). Technical Report.  Institute of Public Health, Ministry of 
Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
 
IPH (2020). National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS) 2019. Vol. 1: NCDs – Non-Communicable Diseases: 
Risk Factors and other Health Problems. Institute of Public Health, National Institutes of Health, Ministry 
of Health Malaysia, Selangor. 
 
Johnson C, Raj TS, Trudeau L, Bacon SL, Padwal R, Webster J & Campbell N (2015). The science of salt: A 
systematic review of clinical salt studies 2013 to 2014. J Clin Hypertens 17(5):401-411.    
 
Lachat C, Khanh LNB, Khan NC, Dung NQ, Anh NDV, Roberfroid D & Kolsteren P (2009). Eating out of home in 
Vietnamese adolescents:Socioeconomic factors and dietray associations. Am J  Clin Nutr 90:1648-1655. 
 
Lee JO & Kim JY (2013). Development of cultural context indicator of fermented food. J Biosci Biotech 5:45-52. 
 
MOH (1985). Food Regulation 1985. Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
MOH (2006). Guide to Nutrition Labelling and Claims. Food Safety and Quality Control Division, Ministry of 
Health Malaysia. 
 
MOH (2015). Salt Reduction Strategy to Prevent and Control NCDF or Malaysia, 2015-2020. Disease Control 
Division, NCD Section, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya.  
 
MOH (2019). Infographic Kit Healthier Choice Logo Malaysia. Nutrition Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia, 
Putrajaya. 
 
Mirnalini K, Zalilah MS, Saﬁah MY, Tahir A, Siti Haslina MD, Siti Rohana D, Khairul Zarina MY, Mohd Hasyami S 
& Normah H (2008). Energy and nutrient intakes: Findings from the Malaysian adult Nutrition Survey 
(MANS). Mal J Nutr 14(1):1-24. 
 
NCCFN (2017). Recommended Nutrient Intakes for Malaysia. A Report of the Technical Working Group on 
Nutritional Guidelines National Coordinating Committee on Food and Nutrition Ministry of Health 
Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
 
Nguyen L, Salanta LC, Socaci S, Tofana M, Farcas A & Pop C (2020). A mini review about monosodium glutamate. 
Bulletin of University of Agricultural Science and Veterinary Medicine Cluj-Napoca. Food Sci Technol 
77(1). doi: 10.15835/buasvmcn-fst:2019.0029. 
 
Odegaard AO, Koh WP, Yuan J-M, Gross MD & Pereira MA (2012). Western-style fast food intake and 
cardiometabolic risk in Eastern country. Circulation 126:182-188. 
 
O’Donnell M, Mente A, Alderman MHJ, Brady AJB, Diaz R, Gupta R, Lopez-Jaramillo P, Luft FC, Luscher TF & 
Macia G (2020). Salt and cardiovascular disease: Insufficient evidence to recommend low sodium intake.  
Eur Heart Jour 41(35): 3363-3373. 
 
Powles J, Fahimi S, Micha R,Khatibzadeh S, Shi P, Ezzati M, Engell RE, Lim SS, Danaei G, Mozaffarian D & on 
behalf of the Global Burden of Diseases Nutrition and Chronic Diseases Expert Group (NutriCoDE) (2013). 
Global, regional and national sodium intakes in 1990 and 2010: A systematic analysis of 24 h urinary 
sodium excretion and dietary surveys worldwide. BMJ Open 3(12):e003733.  
 
169Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
SACN  (2003). Salt and Health. Food Standards Scientiﬁ c Advisory Committee on Nutrition, Agency and 
Department of Health, UK. 
 
Shahar S, You YY,  Zainuddin NZS, Michael V, Ambak, Haron H,  He FJ & MacGregor GA  (2019). Sodium content 
in sauces – A major contributor of sodium intake in Malaysia: A cross-sectional survey BMJ Open 
9:e025068.  
 
Tan CH, Chow ZY, Ching SM, Devaraj NK, He FJ, MacGregor GA & Chia YC (2019). Salt content of instant 
noodles in Malaysia: A cross-sectional study. BMJ Open 9:e024702.  
 
Tee ES, Ismail MN, Mohd Nasir A & Khatijah I (1997). Nutrient Composition of Malaysian Foods. 4
th ed. Institute 
of Medical Research, Kuala Lumpur.  
 
USDA and Agricultural Research Services (2009). Nutrient Data Laborarory (online). 
http://www.nal.usda.gov/fnic/foodcomp/search/ (Accessed on 5 March 2009). 
 
Wang YJ, Yeh T, Shih MC, Tu YK & Chen KL (2020). Dietary sodium intake and risk of cardiovascular disease: A 
systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis.  Nutrients 12(10):2934. 
 
WASH (2017). Salt and Your Health. World Action on Salt and Health. 
 
Wessler JD, Hummel SL & Maurer MS (2014). Dietary interventions for heart failure in older adults: Re-emergence 
of the hedonic shift. Prog Cardio Dis 57(2):160-167.  
 
WHO (2007). Reducing Salt Intake in Populations. Report of a WHO Technical meeting, 5-7 October 2006, Paris, 
France. 
 
WHO (2012), Guideline: Sodium Intake for Adults and Children. World Health Organization (WHO), Geneva. 
 
Wilk N, Matus MG, Kearney SM, Olesen SW, Forslund K, Bartolomaeus K, Haase S, Mahler A, Balogh A, Marko L, 
Vvedenskaya O, Kleiner FH, Tsvetkov D, Klug L, Costea PI, Sunagawa S, Maier L, Rakova N, Schatz V, 
Neubert P, Fratzer C, Krannich A, Gollasch M, Grohme DA, Corte-Real BF, Gerlach RG, Basic M, Typas A, 
Wu C, Titze JM, Jantsch J, Boschmann M, Dechend R, Kleinewietfeld M, Kempa S, Bork P, Linker RA, 
Alm EJ & Muller DN (2017). Salt-responsive gut commensal modulates TH17 axis and disease. Nature 
551:585-589. 
170 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Appendices
171Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
172 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Table 10.2: Sources and content of sodium in selected foods
LOW 
(< 120 mg Na  
per standard serving)
MODERATE 
(120-360 mg Na 
per standard serving)
HIGH 
(> 360 mg Na 
per standard serving)
Cereal & cereal products 
 
• Rice, plain, • Rice porridge, instant  
cooked 1 cup – 8 mg Na 1 packet – 294 mg Na 
• Rice, husked, unpolished      
1 cup – 100 mg Na  
 
• Noodle, rice 1 flat piece • Noodle, instant 1 packet – 
(1/2 cup) – 138 mg Na 1340 mg Na 
• Noodle, wet 1 cup – 177 • Noodle, dry 1 round piece 
mg Na (11 x 3.5 cm) – 431 mg Na 
• Noodle snack, flavoured 1  
medium packet – 184 mg  
 
• Bread, white 1 slice  
(10.5 x 9.3 x 1.1) – 64 mg Na 
• Bread, wholemeal 1 slice  
– 78 mg Na 
 
• Biscuit, cream crakers • Biscuit, soda/ plain  
(6.5 x 6.5 x 0.5 cm) < 10 (6.5 x 6.5 x 0.5 cm) 5 square 
square pieces – 104 mg Na pieces – 206 mg Na 
• Crackers, low-salt 1 piece –  
19 mg Na  
 
• Cookies, sesame seed (6.0 x • Cookies, oats (6.0 x 1.0 cm)  
5.5 x 0.5cm) 5 pieces – 6 mg 5 round pieces – 218 mg Na 
 
Starchy roots, tubers & products 
 
• Potato 1 whole large, oval • Potato chips 1 small packet • Potato chip 1 big packet  
(8.5 x 4.5 cm) – 55 mg Na – 128 mg Na – 655 mg Na 
      
Legumes & legumes product 
 
• Soya bean, white 1 cup • Soya bean paste, fermented • Soya sauce "thick" 1  
– 81 mg Na (tau-ceo) 1 tablespoon tablespoon – 564 mg Na 
• Soya bean cake, fermented – 341 mg Na • Soya sauce "thin" 1 
(tempeh) 1 rectangular piece • Soya bean curd, strands tablespoon – 1255 mg Na 
(12.0 x 9.0 x 0.5 cm) (fucok) 1 cup – 188 mg Na • Baked bean, canned 1/2 cup 
– 5 mg Na • Soya bean noodle 1 piece (beans only) – 365 mg Na 
• Soya bean curd, sheet/ (11.5 x 6 cm) – 127 mg Na 
film 1 cup – 11 mg Na • Appalam (8.5 x 0.2 cm)  
5 pieces – 349 mg Na 
  
Nuts, seeds & products 
 
• Mixed nuts, without salt • Peanut butter 3 tablespoon • Mixed nuts, salt added 1 cup 
added 1 cup – 16 mg Na – 177 mg Na – 917 mg Na   
• Watermelon seeds, dried,  
black 3 cups – 168 mg Na   
173Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Table 10.2: Sources and content of sodium in selected foods (cont...)
LOW 
(< 120 mg Na  
per standard serving)
MODERATE 
(120-360 mg Na 
per standard serving)
HIGH 
(> 360 mg Na 
per standard serving)
Vegetable & Vegetable Products 
 
• Fresh vegetables • Chilli sauce, bottle 1 • Canned vegetables 1 cup – 
tablespoon – 224 mg Na 777 mg Na 
• Pickeled vegetables 1 cup – 938 
mg Na 
• Cabbage, Chinese, salted (hum-
choy) 1 cup (chopped) – 2763 
mg Na 
 
• Tomato juice, canned 1/2 cup • Tomato soup, canned 1/2 cup 
– 226 mg Na – 804 mg Na 
• Tomato ketchup (sos tomato)  
1 tablespoon – 171 mg Na 
 
• Seaweed, dried (hai-tai) • Peas, salted, fried 1 cup – 
1/2 cup – 308 mg Na 402 mg Na  
 
Fruits & Fruits Products 
 
• Fresh fruits • Guava, with "asam buoy" • Banana, smoked 100g – 840  
(12.0 x 8.0 x 1.5cm) 2 slice mg Na 
without skin & seeds  
– 184 mg Na 
  
• Fruit cocktail in syrup, canned • Fruit, mixed, spicy pickled 
1 tin (450 ml) – 19 mg Na 100 g – 1480 mg Na  
 
• Durian cake (lempuk) 1 • Durian, fermented 
cylindrical piece (17.0 x (tempoyak) 2 tablespoon 
2.5 cm) – 20 mg Na – 178 mg   
  
Meat and poultry products 
 
• Chicken, breast meat 
1/2 cup • Chicken, fried 1 piece (90 g) • Chicken, fried, fast food  
(131 g) – 55 mg Na – 145 mg Na franchise 1 piece (140 g) 
• Chicken, thigh 1 medium • Chicken burger patty 1 round – 664 mg Na 
(12.5 x 11.3 x 3.2cm) piece – 185 mg Na • Chicken curry, canned 1 can 
– 71 mg Na • Chicken frankfurter – 385 mg Na 
("frankfurter" daging ayam) • Chicken, broth cubes, 
(12.0 x 1.5 cm) 2 pieces, proprietary brand (pati ayam) 
4 inch long – 186 mg Na 1 cube – 1152 mg Na  
 
• Beef, lean 
1/2 cup (122.8 g) • Beef burger patty 1 round • Beef, corned, canned 1/2 cup  
– 82 mg Na piece – 309 mg Na – 777 mg Na  
• Beef frankfurter (12.0 x 2.0 • Beef rendang , canned 1 can 
cm) 2 long piece – 186 mg – 862 mg Na
Na • Beef burger 1 whole – 554 
• Beef, extract, proprietary mg Na 
brand (pati daging lembu) • Beef, broth cubes, proprietary 
1 teaspoon – 337 mg Na brand 1 cube – 864 mg Na 
174 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
LOW 
(< 120 mg Na  
per standard serving)
MODERATE 
(120-360 mg Na 
per standard serving)
HIGH 
(> 360 mg Na 
per standard serving)
• Goat meat, lean 1 cup (223 g) • Mutton, lean 1 cup (198.6 g) • Mutton curry, canned 1 can 
– 110 mg Na – 180 mg Na (167 g) – 708 mg Na 
 
• Fresh rabbit, duck (100  g) • Pork (khinzir) 1 bowl (410 g)  
– 46 mg Na – 189 mg Na 
• Pork, medium fat  
• 1 cup (205.8 g) – 195 mg Na  
 
Eggs 
 
• Hen egg, 1 whole 56 mg Na • Duck egg, salted,  
whole 249 mg Na 
 
Fish, shellfish & products 
 
• Fresh fish (except stated in • Fish ball (bebola ikan) • Fish ball (bebola ikan)   
moderate column) (D, 2 cm) 5 whole, small (D, 3 cm) 2 whole, large 
– 296 mg Na – 378 mg Na 
• Bream, threadfin, Japanese • Fish, unspecified, dried,  
(kerisi) 1 whole, medium salted 1 piece (7.0 x 3.5 x 0.4 
(22.0 x 8.0 x 2.5 cm) cm) – 433 mg Na 
– 179 mg Na • Scad, hairtail, dried (cencaru, 
• Carp, big head 1 slice kering) 1 piece, tail portion – 
(11.8 x 6.4 x 8.2 cm) 889 mg Na 
– 151 mg Na • Trevally, yellow-banded, dried 
• Carp, common (lee koh) (selar kuning, kering) 1 whole 
1 slice (10.5 x 5 x 11.6 cm) medium (16.0 x 4.5 x 1.5 cm) 
– 134 mg Na – 1113 mg Na 
• Mackerel, Spanish 1 slice • Fish curry, canned (kari ikan 
(8.0 x 2.0 x 15 cm) dalam tin) 1 tin – 1056 mg Na 
– 155 mg Na • Fish "satay" snack ("satay" 
• Snapper, red 1 slice ikan) 5 sticks – 380 mg Na 
(6.0 x 2.0 x 15.0 cm) • Fish sauce (budu) 1 
– 128 mg Na tablespoon – 1032 mg Na 
• Fish crackers, fried • Anchovy, dried, without head 
(15.0 x 7.5 x 0.2 cm) 5 oval and entrails 
piece – 241 mg Na •
1/2 cup – 758 mg Na 
 
• Sardine (18.0 x 3.5 x 2.0 cm) • Sardine, canned 1 small can 
2 whole, small – 60 mg Na – 476 mg Na  
 
• Prawn, pink (11.0 x 1.4 cm) • Prawn, salted, dried 1 • Shrimp, fermented 1 
5 whole, medium – 34 mg Na tablespoon – 255 mg Na tablespoon – 897 mg Na 
• Prawn crackers 1 small • Shrimp paste 1 piece (3.5 x 
packet – 187 mg Na 3.2 x 3.0 cm) – 629 mg Na 
• Prawn paste (hay-ko) 1  
tablespoon – 286 mg Na  
 
• Cuttlefish, fresh 1 whole, • Cuttlefish, dried 1 whole, • Cuttlefish crackers 1 large 
medium (12.5 x 6.0 cm) small (14.5 x 9.5 x 0.5 cm) packet – 421 mg Na 
– 78 mg Na – 314 mg Na   
Table 10.2: Sources and content of sodium in selected foods (cont...)
175Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
LOW 
(< 120 mg Na  
per standard serving)
MODERATE 
(120-360 mg Na 
per standard serving)
HIGH 
(> 360 mg Na 
per standard serving)
• Clam (lala) 10 clam • Crab, blue/ sea crab 1 whole 
– 121 mg Na (128 g) – 377 mg Na 
• Crab, swimming/ live crab,  
1 whole (g) – 392 mg Na 
• Oyster, sauce 1 tablespoon  
– 779 mg Na 
 
Milk & milk products 
 
• Low sodium cheese, cheddar • Cheese, processed, cheddar • Cheese burger 1 whole  
• 1 slice – 21 mg Na 1 slice – 261 mg Na – 864 mg Na 
 
Oils & fats 
 
• Margarine, without salt 0 • Margarine 3 tablespoon 
mg Na – 153 mg Na 
• Butter 2 tablespoon  
– 172 mg Na 
 
Beverages 
 
• Carbonates beverage, cream • Carbonated beverage, 
soda 1 bottle (500 ml) isotonic sports drink 1 bottle  
– 59 mg Na (1500 ml) – 315 mg Na 
• Carbonated beverage,  
isotonic sports drink 1 bottle  
(500 ml) – 105 mg Na   
  
Condiments & spices 
 
• All natural condiments (eg: • All types of instant flavouring 
cloves, cinnamon, anise or seasoning >
 11/2 teaspoon 
seeds, cumin seeds, asam - > 360 mg Na  or 
gelugor, cardamom, chilli • >  1/4 cube - > 360 mg Na 
dried etc.) • Tamarind, paste 1 tablespoon 
– 599 mg Na 
 
Sources: Tee et al, (1997); Holland et al. (1992); USDA and Agricultural Research Service (2009).  
Table 10.2: Sources and content of sodium in selected foods (cont...)
176 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
177Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
healthy food
KEY 
MESSAGE
11
Limit sugar intake in  
foods and beverages
11.1 Terminology 
178 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
1111
KEY MESSAGE
LIMIT SUGAR INTAKE IN 
FOODS AND BEVERAGES
Prof. Dr. Ruzita Abd. Talib, Assist. Prof. Dr. Hanapi Mat Jusoh, Dr. Siti Sabariah Buhari and  
Ms. Tan Yen Nee
Total sugars 
 
Total sugars comprise all mono- and 
disaccharides. Derived from any source including 
naturally occurring and free sugars. 
These include 
sucrose (table sugar), fructose, glucose (dextrose), 
and lactose (milk sugar). (Erickson & Slavin, 2015; 
David & Elizabeth, 2018). 
 
Free sugars 
 
Free sugars include all sugars added by the 
manufacturer,
 cook, or the consumer as well as 
sugars that are naturally present in honey, syrups, 
fruit/ vegetable juices and fruit/ vegetable juice 
concentrates. These exclude sugar which is 
present in whole (intact, cooked, or dried) fruit and 
vegetables or dairy products (Erickson & Slavin, 
2015; WHO, 2015).   
 
Added sugars 
 
Added sugars are sugars that are not naturally 
found in the food product and are added to foods 
during processing,
 culinary preparation, or during 
meals. These include brown sugar, corn 
sweeteners, corn syrup, dextrose, fructose, glucose, 
sucrose, high-fructose corn syrup, honey, invert 
sugar, lactose, maltose, malt syrup, molasses, and 
raw sugar (Erickson & Slavin, 2015). In the pre-
packaged foods, no added sugar does not mean 
that no sugar is present, it just means that no 
sugars have been added during the manufacturing 
process, since most foods contain sugars in some 
form (Rachel et al., 2017). 
 
 
 
 
 
179Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Hidden sugar 
 
Hidden sugars are the ingredients in foods and 
drinks, although they are not seen as ‘sugar’. 
The 
hidden sugars can be identiﬁ ed by reading the 
food label. Some foods may not have the word 
‘sugar’ in the ingredients list on the food and 
beverages products packaging, but the products 
still have sugar with labeled in a diff erent name 
such as sucrose, dextrose, maltose, fructose, 
lactose, glucose and honey (US FDA, 2014). Major 
sources of hidden sugar are soft drinks, sweets and 
candies, cakes, fruit drinks and juices (not 
homemade), ﬂavoured waters, dairy desserts and 
several milk products, soups and sauces (not 
homemade), processed breakfast foods and 
smoothies, tea and coff ee drinks, canned 
vegetables, industrial breads, hamburger buns, 
salad dressings, noodles and some alcoholic 
beverages (Marí, 2017). 
 
Sugar Sweetened Beverages (SSBs) 
 
Sugar-sweetened beverages (regular soft drinks) 
include carbonated and noncarbonated beverages,
 
which are usually sweetened with HFCS or 
sucrose. These beverages have relatively high 
calorie and sugar contents, but no or a very small 
amount of other nutrients (Chen, 2013). 
 
Artiﬁcial Sweeteners 
 
Artiﬁcial sweeteners also known as non-nutritive 
sweeteners are deﬁ ned as food additives that 
when added to food can impart a sweet taste 
(Yebra-Biurrun,
 2005). The permitted artiﬁ cial 
sweeteners include saccharin (2-sulphobenzoic 
imide), sodium saccharin (sodium salt of 2–
selphobenzoic imide), acesulfame potassium, 
neotame and aspartame which contain low or no 
calorie (MOH, 1985). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.2 Introduction 
 
Sugars are a type of carbohydrate which provide energy. 
Sugar are commonly used in food and beverages to 
enhance the taste. However, excessive sugar intake can 
lead to health problems, such as increasing the risk of 
weight gain, diabetes, dental caries, and an increased risk 
of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) or metabolic 
diseases. In addition, overconsumption of added sugar 
can result in a poor diet quality (Fidler, Kobe & Štimec, 
2012).  
 
On average, Malaysian Adults consumed about 18.5 g or 
4 teaspoons of sugar per day (IPH, 2014). The sources of 
sugar were sweetened beverages and local kuih. The 
WHO (2015) guidelines recommends that free sugars 
intake should not exceed 10% of total energy intake 
which equals to 50 g of sugar per day for the average 
adult (at a calorie intake of 2000 kcal).  
 
Therefore, recently the government introduced sugar 
sweetened beverage tax, to encourage foods and 
beverages industries to reformulate their products into 
less sugar content. On top of that, the industries are 
mandatory to declare total sugars on the nutrition 
information panel (NIP) of their food products. The NIP 
may increase awareness of consumers about sugar 
content in the products (James et al., 2013) 
 
 
11.3 Scientiﬁc basis 
 
The focus of scienti ﬁc evidence on sugars guidelines in 
relation to health revolves around three main health 
issues: Sugar is the main cause of dental caries and that 
a lower absolute sugar intake would result in an 
appreciable decrease in caries incidence. Sugar increases 
overall energy intake, leading to an unhealthy diet and 
may cause weight gain and increased risk of NCDs or 
metabolic diseases such as cardiovascular disease (CVD), 
type 2 diabetes (T2DM), and non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease (NAFLD). Finally, overconsumption of sugar may 
reduce the intake of foods containing more nutritionally 
adequate calories and could displace micronutrient-
dense foods from the diet, resulting in a poor diet quality. 
 
 
180 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
In addition to the above, this section also discusses the 
beneﬁt of artiﬁcial sweeteners or artiﬁcial sweeteners on 
health. Foods and beverages containing artiﬁ cial 
sweeteners become more popular because of their 
calorie-free sweet taste and the current need to substitute 
sugar as a strategy in weight and T2DM management. 
 
 
11.3.1 Dental caries 
 
Dental caries is the most prevalent non-communicable 
chronic disease worldwide and affects all age groups from 
infants to older adults (Moynihan, 2016). Undeniably,
 it is 
also a continuing public health problem in Malaysia. The 
National Oral Health Survey of Adults (NOHSA) 2010 
showed that nine in ten of Malaysian adults experienced 
dental caries and it was signiﬁcantly higher in rural areas 
(OHD, 2013). Dental caries prevalence among 12-year-old 
school children was 33.3% in 2017 as compared to 41.5% 
in 2007 (OHD, 2017a). The same trend was observed 
among the preschoolers where 71.3% experienced dental 
caries in 2015, while in 2005 it was 76.2% (OHD, 2017b). 
Although there was a declined trend of dental caries 
observed throughout the years, however it showed slow 
reduction for all target groups. Among adults, dental 
caries severity as measured by mean DMFT was 11.66 
and was signiﬁcantly higher among females and those in 
rural (OHD, 2013).    
 
Untreated dental caries may cause severe pain and 
infection, which affects children’s school attendance and 
performance and adult’s productivity at work 
(Kaussebum, 2015). Higher oral health impacts were 
found among adults with dental caries as compared to 
caries free adults (OHD, 2013). In addition, dental caries 
is costly to health care systems and is a lifelong 
progressive and cumulative disease that tracks to 
adulthood, even with exposure to ﬂuoride through water 
or mouth-care products (Bernabé & Sheiham, 2014). 
 
Free sugars are the essential dietary factor in the 
development of dental caries because dental caries do not 
occur in the absence of dietary sugars. Dental caries 
develops when bacteria in the mouth metabolize sugars 
to produce acid that demineralizes the hard tissues of the 
teeth (enamel and dentine) (WHO, 2017). The 
consumption of sugar containing foods imposes a risk on 
the dental caries. The actual risk of a certain food is 
modulated by many factors that are divided in food-
related factors such as the release of the sugars, the 
stickiness of the product, the type and concentration of 
the sugar and consumer-related factors such as the 
frequency of sugar consumption, the drinking and 
chewing habits, the chewing and swallowing efficiency, 
salivary ﬂow and composition, the presence of cariogenic 
dental plaque and the use of ﬂuorides (Van Loveren, 2019).  
 
Both the amount of sugars and the frequency with which 
they are consumed is a risk factor for the development of 
dental caries. Limiting free sugars intake to less than 10% 
of total energy intake and ideally even further, to less than 
5% may minimizes the risk of dental caries throughout the 
life course (WHO, 2017).  
 
 
11.3.2 Obesity 
 
The global prevalence of obesity has increased 
signiﬁcantly over the past 40 years. W
orldwide, obesity 
has nearly tripled since 1975 where 39% of adults aged 18 
years and above were overweight and 13% were obese in 
2016 (Jaacks et al., 2019). Malaysia is no exception to that, 
with rising obesity rates and about one in two adults in 
Malaysia were overweight or obese, Malaysia is now the 
most overweight and obese nation in the south-east 
Asian region (Mariapun, Ng & Hairi, 2018; IPH, 2020). This 
is alarming because overweight or obesity increases the 
risk of major chronic diseases such as cardiometabolic 
diseases and cancers (Ryan et al., 2016). While complex 
interactions of genetic, metabolic, cultural, environmental, 
socioeconomic and behavioural factors contribute to 
obesity, dietary factors remain as major determinants of 
obesity (Hruby & Hu, 2015). An excessive energy intake, 
the frequency of daily meals, eating alone and snack and 
beverage consumption were associated with obesity 
(Taillie et al., 2015).  
181Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Along with the rapid economic development, food and 
the Malaysian’s eating culture has undergone some form 
of transformation. The practice of eating-out and 
preferences to Western diet which is higher in sugar from 
processed foods had become a trend (Noraziah & Azlan, 
2012; Lipoeto, Khor & Angeles-Agdeppa, 2013). Sugar-
containing foods that contributed most to energy intakes 
of Malaysian adults were added sugars from beverages 
(i.e., cordial syrup, tea, coff ee, chocolate ﬂ avoured 
beverages), condensed milk (added to beverages) and 
local kuih (starchy traditional cakes). Less than 1.2% of 
the daily caloric intake was obtained from jam, 
carbonated drinks, and “ABC ice” (shaved ice topped 
with syrup, nuts and beans). On average, Malaysians 
consumed 30 g (3 dessert spoon) of sweetened 
condensed milk (equivalent to approximately 16 g sugar), 
and 21 g (4 teaspoons) of table sugar which were 
habitually added to beverages such as teh tarik, kopi, and 
chocolate ﬂavoured beverages (Amarra, Khor & Chan, 
2016).  
 
Several studies investigated the association of sugar 
intake with weight gain or obesity. Studies proved that 
regular sugar sweetened beverages (SSB) consumption 
has been positively associated with increased body 
weight and risk of obesity (Hu, 2013). Based on a 
systematic review of 32 experimental studies published 
until December 2013 in peer-reviewed journals shows 
that the majority of studies with strong methodology 
indicated a positive association between SSB 
consumption and risk of obesity or obesity, especially 
among overweight children (Della Torre et al., 2016). 
Besides, a review of thirteen reviews and meta-analyses 
concluded that there was a direct association between 
SSB consumption and weight gain, overweight, and 
obesity in children and adolescents (Keller & Bucher Della 
Torre, 2015). Besides, consumption of high-sugary snacks 
has been associated with weight gain (Romieu et al., 
2017). 
 
A systematic review and meta-analysis investigated the 
association between consumption of ultra-processed food 
and noncommunicable disease risk, morbidity and 
mortality. Forty-three observational studies were included 
(N = 891,723) demonstrated consumption of ultra-
processed food was associated with increased risk of 
overweight, obesity, abdominal obesity, all-cause 
mortality, metabolic syndrome and depression in adults 
as well as wheezing but not asthma in adolescents. In 
addition, consumption of ultra-processed food was 
associated with cardiometabolic diseases, frailty, irritable 
bowel syndrome, functional dyspepsia and cancer (breast 
and overall) in adults while also being associated with 
metabolic syndrome in adolescents and dyslipidaemia in 
children (Lane et al, 2020).  
 
 
11.3.3 Diabetes 
 
Evidence is still inconclusive on the association between 
sugar consumption per se and T2DM. 
There is evidence to 
suggest that diets high in added sugar promote directly 
and indirectly the development of T2DM. Directly, the 
fructose component of sugar causes dysregulation of lipid 
and carbohydrate metabolism. Indirectly, sugar promotes 
positive energy balance, thus body weight and fat gain, 
which also cause dysregulation of lipid and carbohydrate 
metabolism. Due to the direct and indirect pathway, 
Stanhope, Schwarz & Havel (2013) have suggested that 
risk for T2DM is increased when added sugar is consumed 
with diets that allow for body weight and fat gain. 
 
However, Tsilas et al. (2017) conducted a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies 
of the relation between intake of sugars and incident 
T2DM. The analyses showed that intakes of total sugars 
and fructose were not associated with T2DM, but intake 
of sucrose was associated with an 11% decrease in T2DM. 
The systematic reviews and meta-analyses also failed to 
show that sugar-sweetened beverages are associated 
with an increase in the risk of T2DM.   
 
 
11.3.4 Cardiovascular disease and other 
metabolic diseases 
 
Too much added sugar can be one of the greatest threats 
to cardiovascular diseases and other metabolic diseases 
including non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
. The data 
reported by Yang et al. (2014) suggested that the higher 
the intake of added sugar, the greater the risk of CVD. 
They also show that the average level of added sugar 
consumption in 15% of daily calories, is associated with 
an 18% increase in risk for CVD mortality. Recent study 
showed that risk of death increased among adults who 
consumed more sugary drinks. Sugary drinks were also 
associated with higher mortality rates from 
cardiovascular disease (CVD), as well as higher cancer 
rates (Malik et al., 2019). 
 
The meta-analyses conclude that fructose and/ or sugar 
consumption increase total and LDL-C (Zhang et al., 
2013), TG, total and LDL-C, and blood pressure 
(TeMorenga et al., 2014), and have signiﬁcant effects on 
most components of metabolic syndrome (increased 
systolic blood pressure, fasting glucose and TG, decreased 
HDL) (Kelishadi, Mansourian & Heidari-Beni, 2014). 
Another meta-analysis concludes that the available 
evidence is not suffi ciently robust to draw conclusions 
regarding the effects of fructose, high fructose corn syrup 
(HFCS), or sucrose consumption on NAFLD (Chung et al., 
2014). In addition, Wang et al. (2012 & 2014) concluded 
that there were no relationships between fructose 
consumption and levels of uric acid or postprandial 
triglycerides. 
 
 
11.3.5 Behaviour and cognitive function 
 
The association between sugar intake and hyperactivity 
was suggested to be based on two hypotheses. The 
ﬁrst 
was a possible allergic response. The second was that 
hyperactive children might experience functional reactive 
hypoglycemia (Howard & Wylie-Rosett, 2002). However, a 
meta-analysis of 16 randomized trials in hyperactive 
children found that reducing sugar content of the diet did 
not reduce the degree of hyperactivity (Wolraich, Wilson 
& White, 1995).  
182 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
The recent meta-analysis suggests that an unhealthy diet 
can increase the risk of attention deﬁ cit hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD), whereas a healthy diet, would protect 
against these outcomes. The unhealthy dietary pattern, 
characterized by the consumption of saturated fat and 
reﬁned sugar was associated with the risk of hyperactivity 
or ADHD occurrence (Del- Ponte et al., 2019). 
 
 
11.3.6 Poor dietary quality 
 
Diet high in sugar may affect the intake of micronutrients. 
A high-sugar content of food/ beverages was found to 
contribute signiﬁcantly to the total caloric intake,
 but it 
does not satisfy nutrient requirements (Fidler, Kobe & 
Štimec, 2012). The intake of sugar displaces foods that are 
rich in micronutrients. Therefore, diets that are rich in 
sugar may be poorer in micronutrients. Foods high in 
added sugar tend to have lower nutrient densities, and 
thus, provide little nutritional value. By contrast, foods 
with naturally occurring sugars tend to be higher in 
nutrients (Langlois & Garriguet, 2011).   
 
 
11.3.7 Relationship between artiﬁcial 
sweeteners consumption and health 
outcomes 
 
Foods and beverages containing arti
ﬁcial sweeteners 
become more popular in recent years especially due to 
their calorie-free sweet taste and the current need to 
substitute sugar as a strategy to tackle weight gain and 
other health problems. There are a number of artiﬁ cial 
sweeteners that are deemed to be permitted according to 
Malaysian Food Regulation 1985 (MOH, 1985). While 
these can be consumed, their potential health beneﬁ ts 
and adverse health e ffects, including risk for cancer, 
diabetes, dental caries and obesity should also be 
evaluated.  
 
Based on a systematic review that analyzed the 
relationship between artiﬁ cial sweetener consumption 
and cancer involving 599,741 participants, no conclusive 
evidence to suggest artiﬁ cial sweeteners cause cancer 
(Mishra et al., 2015). In another scoping review, it was 
concluded that in healthy subjects, there is also 
inconclusive evidence for bene ﬁcial and harmful e ffects 
of artiﬁcial sweeteners and the risk for cancer, diabetes, 
dental caries, weight gain and obesity (Lohner, Toews & 
Meerpohl, 2017).  
 
Recently, a more comprehensive systematic review was 
published investigating the association between intake 
of non-sugar sweeteners (NSS) and various health 
outcomes. In this review, it was indicated that intake of 
NSS in adults had a small beneﬁcial effect on body mass 
index and fasting blood glucose. However, this evidence 
is considered very low and low certainty of evidence from 
a limited number of small studies. On the contrary, no 
differences were found on oral health, mood, behaviour, 
cancer and kidney disease when comparing between 
intake or no intake as well as between lower and high 
doses of NSS (Toews et al., 2019).  
 
In essence, there is no sound scientiﬁc evidence 1 to date 
that suggests the use of permitted arti ﬁcial sweeteners 
are not safe. While this could be true, the potential future 
risk may not be entirely excluded. There is a need for both 
further primary research and high quality comprehensive 
systematic reviews including meta-analyses to inform 
future recommendations about the health beneﬁ ts and 
risks of artiﬁcial sweeteners.  
183Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Per Capita Consumption of Sugar (kg-raw value)
Malaysia Singapore Thailand Brunei Indonesia Philipines Vietnam Cambodia
1991 1994 1997 2000 2005 2009 2012
Figure 11.1. Per capita consumption of sugar (kg-raw value) in Asian countries 
Source: Malmö University (n.d) 
11.4 Current status 
The cultivation of sugarcane in Malaysia has signiﬁcantly 
declined over the past 20 years and in such a situation, 
the country has to depend on imports for two-thirds of its 
requirements. In 2018, Malaysia had imported 2.1 million 
tonnes of sugar of which mainly from Brazil (76%), 
Australia (14%) and Thailand (5%) (GAIN, 2017). In terms 
of consumption, sugar consumption per capita among 
Malaysian has increased from 38.5 kg in 1991 to 51.8 kg in 
2012, which was among the highest within the 
neighbouring countries (Figure 11.1). The overall 
domestic consumption of sugar in Malaysia has also 
increased from 1.7 million tonnes in the year 2014/2015 
to 2 million tonnes as of May 2019/2020 (Figure 11.2).  
 
World Centrifugal Sugar: Human Domestic Consumption
(1,000 Metric Tons, Raw Value)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
Malaysia Thailand Indonesia Philipines Vietnam Bangladesh
2014-/15 2015-/16 2016-/17 2017-/18 2018-/19 2019-/20
Figure 11.2: World centrifugal sugar: Human domestic consumption (1,000 metric tonnes, raw value) 
Source: USDA Foreign Agriculture Service (2019) 
184 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
According to Malaysian Adults Nutrition Survey (MANS) 
2014, approximately 55.9% of the population consumed 
sugar (white, brown and palm sugar) daily while the mean 
sugar intake was about 18.5 g or 3.7 teaspoons per day 
(Noraida, 2018). MANS 2014 also indicated that the 
consumption of sugar was higher in rural areas (68.1% 
consumed daily, 4 teaspoons per day) and in men (58.2% 
consumed daily, 4 teaspoons per day) compared to urban 
areas (50.5% consumed daily, 3.4 teaspoons per day) and 
women (53.3% consumed daily, 3.2 teaspoons per day), 
respectively. In addition, approximately 23.5% of the 
population consumed sweetened condensed milk/ 
creamer daily amounting 24.3 g per day. Men appeared 
to have consumed more servings of sweetened 
condensed milk compared to their women counterparts 
(Noraida, 2018).   
It can be concluded that the mean added sugar intake 
based on MANS 2014 (IPH, 2014) was about 31.5 g per 
day (taking into account that 24.3 g condensed milk 
contains about 13 g sugar). However, it is important to 
note that the data of sugar mentioned above is the sugar 
that is usually added to beverages such as tea, coffee and 
chocolate-based drinks. Sugar added into carbonated 
beverages and local kuih as well as natural sugar in fruits 
and vegetables were not quantiﬁed which could result in 
underreporting in total daily sugar intake. The list of 
commonly consumed beverages by Malaysian adults is 
shown in Table 11.1(IPH, 2014). 
 
 
 
 
Table 11.1: Percentage and mean intake of top ten beverages consumed daily among Malaysian adult population 
No. Beverages Percentage (%) ml/day No. of servings 
(cup)/day
1. Tea 70.30 326 1.81 
2. Malted drink (Milo, Horlick, etc.) 59.10 315 1.57 
3. Coffee 53.20 357 1.78 
4. Soya milk 51.40 274 1.36 
5. Carbonated drink 45.70 186 0.93 
6. Fruit juice 41.10 273 1.36 
7. Cordial syrup 34.40 153 0.76 
8. Ready to drink beverage 30.80 287 1.43 
9. Pre-mixed drink (3 in 1) 28.80 315 1.57 
10. Energy drink 12.60 680 3.48
Surprisingly, the sugar intakes among Malaysians based 
on two other studies were much higher than those 
reported in MANS 2014 (IPH, 2014). A study conducted 
by Nik Shanita, Norimah & Abu Hanifah (2012) found that 
mean intake of added sugar of adults in Klang Valley was 
approximately 44.2 g per day or 9 teaspoons/day. In a 
more recent and relatively large study, total sugar intake 
among Malaysian senior citizen aged 60 years and above 
who live in Johor, Perak, Kelantan and Selangor was 40.5 
g per day (8 teaspoons/day) from which added sugar 
intake was 33 g per day (6 teaspoons/day) (NurZetty et 
al., 2018). The sources of sugar that were most consumed 
among them were sweetened beverages which included 
added sugar and sweetened condensed milk that were 
mixed in tea or coffee and also in local kuih (NurZetty  et 
al., 2018).  
 
As mentioned earlier, the new WHO (2015) guidelines 
recommends that free sugars intake should not exceed 
10% of total energy intake. Based on ﬁndings from MANS 
2014 (IPH, 2014) and Nik Shanita, Norimah & Abu Hanifah 
(2012), the sugar intake among Malaysians were within 
the recommended range at 8.6% and 9.4%, respectively. 
Nevertheless, it is strongly recommended that free sugar 
intake should remain below 10% of total energy intake to 
prevent excess of calories intake which may lead to 
obesity and NCDs. However, WHO (2015) recommend the 
intake ideally less than 5% which would provide 
additional health beneﬁ ts in the form of reduced dental 
caries.  
 
Information about sugar content of foods commonly 
consumed by Malaysians is rather limited. In fact, the 
national nutrient database, the Malaysian Food 
Composition Database (MyFCD), ﬁrst published by Tee et 
al (1997), has yet to publish a sugar database. Hence, the 
sugar content of selected foods and beverages presented 
in Table 11.2 to Table 11.6 were obtained from recently 
published local articles (Sabeetha, Amin & Barakatun 
Nisak, 2017; Norhayati et al., 2018; Rosmawati et al., 2018; 
Chong et al., 2019). 
 
Source: IPH (2014) 
185Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
11.5 Key Recommendations 
Key Recommendation 1 
 
Limit intake of sugar in foods. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. Choose or prepare kuih,
 cookies and cakes 
with less sugar. 
 
2. Replace desserts such as sweet puddings, 
cookies and cakes with fresh fruits. 
 
3. Reduce the frequency of consuming food 
containing sugar. 
 
4. Avoid adding sugar while cooking or to 
your meal. 
 
5. Limit intake of ultra-processed foods such 
as sweet, candies, breads and buns, 
cookies, biscuits, pastries and cakes. 
 
6. Avoid consuming sugary foods during 
morning and afternoon snacks and close to 
bedtime 
 
7. Read food labels to choose low in sugar - 
food. 
 
8. Limit intake of foods that sugar is listed as 
the ﬁrst ingredient in the ingredient list on 
the food label. 
Key Recommendation 2 
 
Limit intake of sugar in beverages. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. Always choose plain water
. 
 
 
2. Limit intake of ultra-processed beverages such as 
carbonated and non-carbonated sugar-sweetened 
beverages (soft drink, syrup and cordial). 
 
3. Limit intake of beverages with added sugar and 
sweetened condensed milk (teh tarik, coff ee, air 
batu campur, cendol, bubble tea) and premix 
beverages. 
 
4. Avoid consuming sugary beverages during 
morning and afternoon snack and close to 
bedtime. 
 
5. Read food labels to choose low in sugar - 
beverages. 
 
6. Limit intake of beverages that sugar is listed as the 
ﬁrst ingredient in the ingredient list on the food 
label. 
 
 
 
 
Additional recommendation: Artiﬁcial sweetener 
 
Special consideration when consuming artiﬁcial sweeteners: 
 
1. Use arti
ﬁcial sweeteners in moderation and those approved by the Food Regulation of Malaysia 1985.  
 
2. Intake of arti ﬁcial sweeteners should not become the sole and primary approach in obesity and diabetes 
management.  
 
186 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
11.6 References 
 
Amarra MSV, Khor G & Chan P (2016). Intake of added sugar in Malaysia: A review. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr 25(2): 
227-240. 
 
Bernabé E & Sheiham AA (2014). Age, period and cohort trends in caries of permanent teeth in four developed 
countries. Am J Public Health 104:e115-121. 
 
Channel News Asia (n.d.).. (Accessed on 6 February 2020). 
 
Chen L (2013). Beverages and Health:  Elsevier. 
 
Chong CP,  Suzana S & Mohd Fairulnizal MN (2019). Individual sugars contents in cooked dishes, processed 
foods, fruits and beverages commonly consumed by Malaysian. l 80:1-9. 
 
Chung M, Ma J, Patel K, Berger S, Lau J & Lichtenstein AH (2014). Fructose, high-fructose corn syrup, sucrose, 
and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease or indexes of liver health: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Am 
J Clin Nutr 100(3):833-849. 
 
Del-Ponte B, , ,  &  (2019). Dietary patterns and attention deﬁcit/ hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. J Affect Disord 252:160-173. 
 
Della Torre SB, Keller A, Depeyre JL & Kruseman M (2016). Sugar-sweetened beverages and obesity risk in 
children and adolescents: A systematic analysis on how methodological quality may inﬂuence conclusions. 
J Acad of Nutr Diet 116(4):638-659. 
 
Erickson J & Slavin J (2015). Total, added, and free sugars: Are restrictive guidelines science-based or achievable? 
Nutrients 7(4):2866-2278. 
 
FAO (2019). Ultra-processed foods, diet quality, and health using the NOVA classi ﬁcation system. Monteiro, 
C.A., Cannon, G., Lawrence, M., Costa Louzada, M.L. & Pireira Machado, P. Rome.  
 
Fidler MN, Kobe H & Stimec M (2012). Dietary intake of macro- and micronutrients in Slovenian adolescents: 
Comparison with reference values. Ann Nutr Metab 61:305-313. 
 
GAIN (Global Agriculture Information Network) (2017). Malaysia Sugar Annual 2017. USDA Foreign Agricultural 
Service, US Department of Agriculture. 
 
Howard BV & Wylie-Rosett J (2002). Sugar and cardiovascular disease: A statement for healthcare professionals 
from the committee on nutrition of the council on nutrition, physical activity and metabolism from the 
American Heart Association. Circulation 106:523-527. 
 
Hruby A & Hu FB (2015). The epidemiology of obesity: A big picture. Pharmacoeconomics 33(7):673-689. 
 
Hu FB (2013). Resolved: There is suffi cient scientiﬁ c evidence that decreasing sugar-sweetened beverage 
consumption will reduce the prevalence of obesity and obesity-related diseases. Obes Rev 14:606-619. 
 
IPH (2014). The National Health and Morbidity Survey 2014: Malaysian Adult Nutrition Survey (MANS). Vol II: 
Survey Findings. Institute for Public Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
IPH (2020). National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS) 2019: Non-Communicable Diseases, Healthcare 
Demand, and Health Literacy – Key Findings. Institute for Public Health, National Institutes of Health, 
Ministry of Health Malaysia, Selangor.  
 
Jaacks LM, Vandevijvere S, Pan A, McGowan CJ, Wallace C, Imamura F, Mozaffarian D, Swinburn B & Ezzati M 
(2019). The obesity transition: Stages of the global epidemic. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 7(3):231-240. 
 
James CH, Kelly CW, Joanne EA, Katherine MK & Mary KM (2013). Effects of front-of-package and shelf nutrition 
labeling systems on consumers. Nutr Rev 71(1):1-14. 
 
Kassebaum NJ, Bernabé E, Dahiya M, Bhandari B, Murray CJ, Marcenes W. (2015). Global burden of untreated 
caries: a systematic review and metaregression. J Dent Res 94(5):
 650-8. doi:10.1177/0022034515573272. 
 
Keller A & Della Torre BS (2015). Sugar-sweetened beverages and obesity among children and adolescents: A 
review of systematic literature reviews. Child Obes 11(4):338-346. 
 
Kelishadi R, Mansourian M & Heidari-Beni M (2014). Association of fructose consumption and components of 
metabolic syndrome in human studies: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Nutrition 30(5):503-510. 
 
 
187Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Lane MM, Davis JA, Beattie S, Gómez-Donoso C, Loughman A, O'Neil A, Jacka F, Berk M, Page R, Marx, M 
&RocksT (2020). Ultra-processed food and chronic noncommunicable diseases: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis of 43 observational studies. Obesity Reviews. 2020;1–19. 
 
Langlois K & Garriguet D (2011). Sugar consumption among Canadians of all ages. Health Rep 22(3):23-27. 
 
Lipoeto N, Khor GL & Angeles-Agdeppa I (2013). Food consumption patterns and nutrition transition in South-
East Asia. Public Health Nutr 16(9):1637-1643. 
 
Lohner S, Toews I & Meerpohl JJ (2017). Health outcomes of non-nutritive sweeteners: Analysis of the research 
landscape. Nutr J 16(1):55. 
 
Malik VS, Li Y, Pan A, De Koning L, Schernhammer E,  Willett WC & Hu FB (2019). Long-term consumption of 
sugar sweetened and artiﬁ cially sweetened beverages and risk of mortality in US adults. Circulation, 
139:2113-2125. 
 
Malmö University (n.d.).  (Accessed on 4 October 2020) 
 
Marí JAT (2017). Hidden sugar in food: A risk for health. J Clin Nutr Diet 3:5.  
 
Mariapun J, Ng CW & Hairi NN (2018). The gradual shift of overweight, obesity, and abdominal obesity towards 
the poor in a multi-ethnic developing country: Findings from the Malaysian National Health and Morbidity 
Surveys. J Epidemiol 28(6):279-286. 
 
Mishra A, Ahmed K, Froghi S & Dasgupta P (2015). Systematic review of the relationship between arti ﬁcial 
sweetener consumption and cancer in humans: Analysis of 599,741 participants. Int J Clin Pract 69(12):1418-1426. 
 
MOH (1985). Food Regulation 1985. Department of Public Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
Moynihan P (2016). Sugars and dental caries: Evidence for setting a recommended threshold for intake. Adv Nutr 
7(1):149-156. 
 
Nik Shanita S, Norimah AK & Abu Hanifah S (2012). Development and validation of a food frequency 
questionnaire (FFQ) for assessing sugar consumption among adults in Klang Valley, Malaysia. Mal J Nutr 
18:283-293.  
 
Noraziah A & Mohd Azlan A (2012). The food consumption and eating behaviour of Malaysian urbanites: Issues 
and concerns. GMJSS 8(6):157-165. 
 
Noraida MK, Mohamad Hasnan A, Azli B@S, Balkish MN, Chan YY & Tahir AA (2018). Food choices among 
Malaysian adults: Findings from Malaysian Adults Nutrition Survey (MANS) 2003 and MANS 2014. Mal J Nutr 
24(1):63-75. 
 
Norhayati MK, Mohd Fairulnizal MN, Mohd Naeem MN, Nazline MK, Aswir AR, Wan Sulong WO, Norliza AH, 
Janarthini S & Rusidah S (2018). Individual and total sugar contents of 83 Malaysian foods. J Food Res 7:3. 
 
NurZetty SZ, Suzana S, Nik Shanita S, Hasnah H & Mohd Azahadi O (2018). Sugar intake and metabolic syndrome 
among older adults in Peninsular Malaysia. Mal J Nutr 24(2):163-174. 
 
OHD (2013). National Oral Health Survey of Adults 2010 (NOHSA, 2010). Oral Health Division, Ministry of Health 
Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
  
OHD (2017a). National Health and Morbidity Survey 2017: National Oral Health Survey of Schoolchildren 2017 
(NHMS 2017: NOHSS 2017). Vol. II: Oral Health Status of 12-year-old Schoolchildren. Oral Health Division, 
Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
 
OHD (2017b). National Oral Health Survey of Preschool Children 2015 (NOHPS 2015). Vol. I: Oral Health Status 
and Caries Treatment Needs of 5-year-old Children. Oral Health Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
 
Rachel BA, Lana V, Erin PH & David H (2017). Added sugar in the packaged foods and beverages available at a 
major Canadian retailer in 2015: A descriptive analysis. CMAJ Open 5(1):E1-E6. 
 
Romieu I, Dossus L, Barquera S, Blottière, HM, Franks PW, Gunter M, Hwalla N, Hursting SD, Leitzmann M, 
Margetts B, Nishida C, Potischman N, Seidell J, Stepien M, Wang Y, Westerterp K, Winichagoon P, Wiseman 
M & Willett WC (2017). IARC working group on energy balance and obesity: Energy balance and obesity: 
What are the main drivers? Cancer Causes 28(3):247-258. 
188 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Rosmawati D, Hasnah H, Suzana S, Chong CP, Muhamad Fikri MF & Mohd Fairulnizal MN (2018). Macronutrients 
and sugar content in foods and beverages from three selected zones in Peninsular Malaysia. Sains Malays 
47(7):1557-1562. 
 
Ryan J, Koene RJ, Prizment AE, Blaes A & Konety SH (2016). Shared risk factors in cardiovascular disease and 
cancer. Circulation 133(11):1104-1114. 
 
Sabeetha S, Amin I & Barakatun Nisak MY (2017). Physico-chemical characteristics of watermelon in Malaysia. 
J Trop Agric and Fd Sc 45(2):209-223. 
 
Stanhope KL, Schwarz JM & Havel PJ (2013). Adverse metabolic eff ects of dietary fructose: results from the 
recent epidemiological, clinical, and mechanistic studies. Curr Opin Lipidol 24(3):198-206. 
 
Taillie LS, Afeiche MC, Eldridge AL & Popkin BM (2015). Increased snacking and eating occasions are associated 
with higher energy intake among Mexican children aged 2-13 years. J Nutr 145(11):2570-2577. 
 
Tee ES, Ismail MN, Azudin MN & Khatijah I (1997). Nutrient Composition of Malaysian Foods. Institute for 
Medical Research, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
TeMorenga LA, Howatson AJ, Jones RM & Mann J (2014). Dietary sugars and cardiometabolic risk: Systematic 
review and meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials of the effects on blood pressure and lipids. Am J 
Clin Nutr 100(1):65-79. 
 
Toews I, Lohner S, Küllenberg de Gaudry D, Sommer H & Meerpohl JJ (2019). Association between intake of non-
sugar sweeteners and health outcomes: Systematic review and meta-analyses of randomised and non-
randomised controlled trials and observational studies. BMJ 364:k4718. 
 
Tsilas CS., de Souza R.J., Mejia S.B., Mirrahimi A, Cozma AI, Jayalath VH, Ha V, Tawﬁk R, Di Buono M, Jenkins 
AL,  Leiter LA, Wolever TM, Beyene J, Khan T, Kendall CW, Jenkins DJ & Sievenpiper JL (2017). Relation of 
total sugars, fructose and sucrose with incident type 2 diabetes: A systematic review and meta-analysis of 
prospective cohort studies. CMAJ 189(20):E711-E720 
 
US FDA (2014). How to Understand and Use the Nutrition Facts Label.  U.S. Food and Drug Administration, US.   
 
USDA Foreign Agriculture Service (2019). Sugar: World Markets and Trade. United States Department of 
Agriculture, Foreign Agricultural Service. 
https://public.govdelivery.com/accounts/USDAFAS/subscriber/new. 
 
Van Loveren C (2019). Sugar restriction for caries prevention: Amount and frequency. Which is more important? 
Caries Res 53:168-175. 
 
Wang DD, Sievenpiper JL, de Souza RJ, Chiavaroli L, Ha V, Cozma AI, Mirrahimi A, E Yu M, Carleton AJ, Di Buono 
M, Jenkins AL, Leiter LA, Wolever TM, Beyene J, Kendall CW & Jenkins DJ (2012). The e ffects of fructose 
intake on serum uric acid vary among controlled dietary trials. J Nutr 142(5):916-923. 
 
Wang DD, Sievenpiper JL, de Souza RJ, Cozma AI, Chiavaroli L, Ha V, Mirrahimi, A, Carleton AJ, Buono MD, 
Jenkins AL, Leiter LA, Wolever TMS, Beyene J, Kendall CWC & Jenkins CJA (2014). E ffect of fructose on 
postprandial triglycerides: A systematic review and meta-analysis of controlled feeding trials. Atherosclerosis 
232(1):125-133. 
 
Wolraich ML, Wilson DB & White JW (1995). The effect of sugar on behavior or cognition in children: A meta-
analysis. JAMA 274:1617-1621. 
 
WHO (2015). Guideline: Sugars Intake for Adults and Children. World Health Organization, Geneva. 
 
WHO (2017). Sugars and Dental Caries. World Health Organization, Geneva. 
 
Yang Q, Zhang Z, Gregg EW, Flanders WD, Merritt R & Hu FB (2014). Added sugar intake and cardiovascular 
diseases mortality among US adults. JAMA Intern Med 174:516-524. 
 
Yebra-Biurrun MC (2005). Sweeteners: Encyclopedia of Analytical Science. 2
nd ed. Elsevier. 
 
Zhang YH, An T, Zhang RC, Zhou Q, Huang Y & Zhang J (2013). Very high fructose intake increases serum LDL-
cholesterol and total cholesterol: A meta-analysis of controlled feeding trials. J Nutr 143(9):1391-1398.
Appendices
189Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
190 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Appendices  
 
Table 11.2: Total sugar contents in selected local kuih 
Type of food
Total  
sugar 
(g/100g)
Household 
measurement 
equivalent 
(teaspoon)
Type of food
Total  
sugar 
(g/100g)
Household 
measurement 
equivalent 
(teaspoon)
Kuih keria 24.80 4.96  Putu piring 12.70 2.54  
Bingka ubi 21.50 4.30  Kuih koci 12.10 2.42  
Cekodok pisang 21.10 4.22 Cucur badak 11.90 2.38  
Pau kaya 19.20 3.84 Kuih tepung pelita 11.40 2.28  
Kuih peneram 18.60 3.72 Pengat pisang 11.30 2.26  
Cek Mek Molek 17.50 3.50 Kuih akok 10.10 2.02  
Kuih apam 17.20 3.44 Putu mayam 9.90 1.98  
Kuih kasturi 16.90 3.38 Pengat ubi keledek 9.50 1.90  
Kuih bakar 16.20 3.24 Buah melaka 8.90 1.78 
Kuih apam balik 16.00 3.20 Kuih ketayap 8.70 1.74  
Lepat ubi 15.80 3.16 Kuih talam 8.30 1.66  
Kuih sagu 15.80 3.16 Pau ayam 7.00 1.40 
Kuih kasui 14.80 2.96 Kuih lopes 5.50 1.10 
Pau kacang merah 14.80 2.96 Cucur bilis 4.70 0.94 
Pau kelapa 14.30 2.86 Cucur bawang 3.80 0.76 
Pau goreng 14.20 2.84 Pulut panggang 2.20 0.44 
Kuih lapis 13.70 2.74 Cakoi 1.20 0.24 
Lepat pisang 13.50 2.70 Ketupat 0.50 0.10 
Kuih sri muka 13.30 2.66
Source: Chong et al. (2019)
Type of food
Total 
sugar 
(g/100g)
Household 
measurement 
equivalent 
(teaspoon)
Type of food
Total 
sugar 
(g/100g)
Household 
measurement 
equivalent 
(teaspoon)
191Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Type of food
Total 
sugar 
(g/100g)
Household 
measurement 
equivalent 
(teaspoon)
Type of food
Total 
sugar 
(g/100g)
Household 
measurement 
equivalent 
(teaspoon)
Mee rebus 6.20 1.24 Mee-hoon goreng 2.40 0.48 
Roti canai 4.60 0.92 Kuey teow goreng 2.10 0.42 
Mee bandung 4.00 0.80 Nasi ayam 1.90 0.38 
Capati 3.30 0.66 Nasi lemak 1.50 0.30 
Roti telur 3.10 0.62 Lontong 1.20 0.24 
Murtabak 30.00 0.60 Idli 1.10 0.22 
Mee goreng 2.70 0.54 Tosai 1.10 0.22 
Mee Kari 2.60 0.52 Kuey teow sup 1.10 0.22 
Lempeng 2.60 0.52 Mee sup 0.90 0.18
Table 11.3: Total sugar contents in selected local cooked dishes 
Source: Chong et al. (2019) 
 
Table 11.4: Total sugar contents in selected cereal, starchy & tuber, legume, nut & seed and other 
processed products
Cereal products  
Wafer, chocolate, 39.13 7.83 
full coated  
Biscuit, cream filled 25.65 5.13 
Biscuit, raisin 24.56 4.91 
Biscuit, chocolate 24.17 4.83 
chip  
#Cake, banana 24.00 4.8 
Bun, kaya 22.82 4.56 
Cookies, butter 21.62 4.32 
Biscuit, milk 19.06 3.81 
Muesli 18.75 3.75 
Biscuit, shortbread 17.80 3.56 
Biscuit, oatmeal 16.43 3.29 
Biscuit, cracker 14.92 2.98 
with sugar  
#Bun, coconut 14.9 2.98 
filling  
#Bun, chocolate 14.6 2.92 
filling  
 
#Bun, red bean 14.4 2.88 
filling  
Biscuit, corn 14.02 2.80 
Bun, potato 13.55 2.71 
#Bun, corn cream 12.5 2.50 
filling  
Biscuit, crackers, 9.72 1.94 
vegetable flavour  
Corn flakes 8.58 1.72 
*Bun, plain 6.80 1.36 
*Bread, white 4.40 0.88 
*Bread, wholemeal 3.70 0.74 
*Instant noodles, 2.30 0.46 
curry  
*Biscuit, cream 2.10 0.42 
cracker  
Oatmeal cereal, dry 1.20 0.24 
 
Type of food
Total 
sugar 
(g/100g)
Household 
measurement 
equivalent 
(teaspoon)
Type of food
Total 
sugar 
(g/100g)
Household 
measurement 
equivalent 
(teaspoon)
192 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Starchy root & tuber products  
Tapioca chips, 12.64 2.53 
spicy  
Tapioca chips, 7.61 1.52 
plain, unsalted  
Sweet potato, 5.09 1.02 
red, chips  
Tapioca chips, 4.92 0.98 
black pepper  
Potato chips, spicy 2.75 0.55 
Legume, nut & seed products  
Soya sauce, sweet 42.23 8.45 
Peanut, crush 40.97 8.19 
Peanut/ groundnut, 8.06 1.61  
flour coated  
Pistachio nut 6.41 1.28 
Soya flour 6.33 1.27 
Macadamia nut 4.28 0.86 
Sunflower seed 2.38 0.48 
Hazelnut 1.72 0.34 
Flaxseed 1.69 0.34 
Pumpkin seed 1.10 0.22 
Other processed products  
1Palm sugar 86.70 17.34 
1Seri kaya 47.30 9.46 
2Sweetened 45.90 9.18 
creamer  
2Chili, sauce 27.90 5.58 
2Tomato, sauce 20.50 4.10 
Thousand island, 15.47 3.09 
sauce  
1Peanut butter 12.20 2.44 
Mayonnaise 8.59 1.72 
Source: Norhayati et al. (2018); 1Rosmawati et al (2018); 2Chong et al. (2019)
Table 11.4: Total sugar contents in selected cereal, starchy & tuber, legume, nut & seed and other 
processed products (cont...)
Type of food
Total 
sugar 
(g/100g)
Household 
measurement 
equivalent 
(teaspoon)
Type of food
Total 
sugar 
(g/100g)
Household 
measurement 
equivalent 
(teaspoon)
193Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Sugar & syrup products  
Cordial, pineapple 65.52 13.10 
Cordial, guava 64.63 12.93 
Jam, blueberry 54.78 10.96 
Jam, apricot 53.65 10.73 
Jam, strawberry 52.67 10.53 
Jam, grape 52.43 10.49 
Cordial, roselle 51.03 10.20 
Cordial, soursop 45.39 9.08 
Cordial, mango 43.46 8.69 
Cordial, orange 41.41 8.28 
Cordial, grape 34.90 6.98 
Cordial, sarsi 32.91 6.58 
Cordial, lime 31.22 6.24 
Cordial root beer 15.00 3.00 
Powdered Beverages  
1Pre-mix coffee, 48.6 9.72 
powder  
1Pre-mixed cocoa, 46.40 9.28 
powder  
1Malted milk, 44.80 8.96 
powder  
1Full cream milk, 40.70 8.14  
powder  
1Low fat milk, 39.90 7.98 
powder  
Ready-to-drink Beverages  
1Cocoa ﬂavoured 10.70 2.14 
drink with  
sweetened creamer  
1Coffee with 9.00 1.8 
sweetened creamer  
1Tea with 8.80 1.76 
sweetened creamer  
1Orange ﬂavoured 7.70 1.54 
cordial drink  
1Orange juice, 7.60 1.52 
fresh  
1Soymilk, fresh 7.00 1.4 
1Coffee with sugar 6.90 1.38 
1Barley drink, fresh 6.60 1.32 
1Chrysanthemum 5.70 1.14 
tea, fresh  
Total  
Sugar  
(g/500ml)  
2Bubble milk tea 102.5 20.5 
2Brown sugar 92.5 18.5 
Boba milk tea  
 
Table 11.5: Total sugar contents in selected sugar & syrup products and beverages 
Source: Norhayati et al. (2018); 1Chong et al. (2019); 2Channel News Asia (n.d.)
Type of food
Total 
sugar 
(g/100g)
Household 
measurement 
equivalent 
(teaspoon)
Type of food
Total 
sugar 
(g/100g)
Household 
measurement 
equivalent 
(teaspoon)
194 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
3Pisang berangan 20.40 4.08  
Rambutan 17.90 3.58  
3Ciku 17.10 3.42  
Longan 16.70 3.34  
Mangosteen 15.10 3.02  
Langsat 14.10 2.82  
3Durian 13.90 2.78  
1Watermelon, red, 11.40 2.28 
seeded  
2Pomegranate 10.70 2.14 
1Watermelon, Yellow 10.10 2.01 
Green pear 10.10 2.02 
3Soursop 9.20 1.84 
3Pineapple 8.60 1.72 
2Dragon fruit, white 8.50 1.70 
2Dragon fruit, red 8.40 1.68 
3Papaya 7.80 1.56 
Yellow pear 7.70 1.54 
Tangerine 7.10 1.42 
3Mandarin orange 7.00 1.40 
3Guava 6.70 1.34
Table 11.6: Total sugar contents in selected fruits 
Source: 1Sabeetha et al. (2017), 2Norhayati et al. (2018), Rosmawati et al. (2018); 3Chong et al. (2019).
195Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
KEY 
MESSAGE
12
Drink plenty of  
water daily
12.1 Terminology  
Alcoholic beverage 
 
An alcoholic beverage is a drink containing more 
than 2 percent volume per volume (2% by volume) 
of ethanol or commonly known as alcohol (MOH, 
1985). 
Type of alcohol beverages includes shandy 
(alcohol content less than 2%), beer (lager, ale, or 
stout, with alcohol content less than 9%), wine 
(cider, champagne, peri, tuak, tuak kelapa, lihing or 
todi, with alcohol content between 10 to 25%) and 
brandy (rum, whisky, vodka, gin, samsu, 
samcheng, montoku or langkau with alcohol 
content more than 30%). 
 
Alkaline water 
 
Water that had a higher pH than normal drinking 
water (pH 8 or 9) and also contain alkaline minerals 
and negative oxidation redution potential
. 
 
Beverage 
 
A beverage refers to any one of various liquids 
suitable for drinking,
 excluding plain water. This 
may include tea, coffee, liquids, beer, milk or soft 
drinks. 
Dehydration 
 
Dehydration is excessive loss of body water. 
There 
are a number of causes of dehydration including 
heat exposure, prolonged vigorous exercise, 
vomiting, diarrhoea, kidney disease, and 
medications (diuretics). 
 
Hydration 
 
Hydration is a process of providing an adequate 
amount of liquid to body tissues. 
 
Oxygenated water 
 
Drinking water that contained extra dissolved 
oxygen (from 30 to 120 mg/L) 
 
Reverse osmosis (RO) water 
 
Water that uses puri
ﬁcation methodology that 
removes ions, molecules and other larger particles 
from drinking water using a semipermeable 
membrane and pressure in order to reverse the 
natural ﬂow of water. 
 
196 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
1212
KEY MESSAGE
DRINK PLENTY OF  
WATER DAILY
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Loh Su Peng, Dr. Nor Baizura Md. Yusop, Dr. Razali Mohamed Salleh,  
Ms. Norashikin Ramlan and Dr. Zaitun Yassin.
197Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Total body water (TBW) 
 
Total body water (TBW) comprises extracellular 
ﬂuid (ECF) and intracellular ﬂuid (ICF); averages 
approximately 60% of body weight,
 with a range 
of approximately 45 to 75%. Variability in TBW is 
primarily due to differences in body composition. 
Water 
 
Water is a substance with chemical formula H2O:
 
one molecule of water has two hydrogen atoms 
covalently bonded to a single oxygen atom. Water 
is a tasteless, odourless liquid at room temperature 
and pressure and appears colourless. 
12.2 Introduction 
Water is the principal chemical constituent of human 
body with the formula H 2O. Its molecule contains one 
oxygen and two hydrogen atoms connected by covalent 
bonds. Water is a clear, odourless, tasteless liquid at room 
temperature and pressure that is essential for most animal 
and plant life and is an excellent solvent for many 
substances. Sources of water include boiled tap water, 
bottled mineral water, RO water, drinking water, alkaline 
water, oxygenated water, beverages, soups and alcoholic 
beverages. Water undergoes continuous recycling and is 
the matrix which supports digestion, metabolism, 
nutrient transport, cardiovascular function, and 
temperature regulation.   
 
 
Overall, homeostatic systems in the body generally ensure 
that body water balance is maintained by regulating 
sensations of thirst (water intake) and the quantity of 
urine excreted. In most healthy people, this results in a 
very precise control of water balance, and it is estimated 
that changes are maintained within 0.2% of body mass 
over 24 hours (Grandjean, Reimers & Buyckx, 2003). 
Several of these processes are regulated by the central 
nervous system (CNS) variables as shown in Figure 12.1. 
Each of these variables is simultaneously maintained at a 
speciﬁc set point and constantly changing throughout the 
human life span in response to water and food intake, 
urine production, and non-renal water losses. Due of 
these ﬂuctuations, human body water regulation is also 
dynamic (Amstrong & Johnson, 2018).   
Dietary Intake
Fluid-Electrolvte Variables
Water
Beverages
Food moisture
Sodium
Total solutes
Excretion
Urine 
Sweat
Transdermal water
Respiratory water
Stool water
Total body water
Extracellular Na+, Volume, & Concentration
Intracellular K+, Volume, & Concentration
Blood pressure
Plasma volume
Figure 12.1:  Variables that are regulated as part of body water homeostasis 
Source: Amstrong & Johnson (2018) 
If water loss is not suffi ciently balanced by ﬂ uid intake 
from food and drinks, then dehydration cannot be 
prevented. Deﬁcits in body water may affect the ability of 
the body to maintain homeostasis, while excess in body 
water could result in low sodium concentration in the 
blood and cellular oedema.  Therefore, failure to maintain 
adequate hydration status leads to a variety of adverse 
consequences, both physiological and psychological. 
Despite the importance of adequate water intake, there is 
confusion among the general public and health care 
providers on the amount of water that should be 
consumed.  
198 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
12.3 Scientiﬁc basis 
 
Normal water needs range widely due to numerous 
factors. These includes environmental factors (physical 
activity and climate), dietary factors and physiological 
factors. 
 
 
12.3.1 Environmental factors 
 
Hot weather can cause higher non-renal water loss, 
through mostly sweating
, even at increased water intake 
and low physical activity level (Mora-Rodriguez et al., 
2016). As a tropical country, Malaysia has a steady 
temperature all year round, ranging between 23
oC and 
33oC (Daud, Sarker & Talib, 2000). With average humidity 
from 60 to 80%, it makes Malaysian weather hotter and 
discomfort (Makaremi et al., 2012). Some people who have 
to engage and expose directly to sunshine, such as 
construction workers, are riskier to dehydration than 
those working indoors. Direct exposure to sun heat may 
increase body temperature by 1
oC per hour (Parsons, 
2002). Individuals are advised to learn the risk of 
dehydration when they are engaged in outdoor activities, 
especially under hot and humid condition. If a person 
becomes dehydrated and cannot sweat enough to cool 
his or her body, his or her internal temperature may rise to 
dangerously high levels. This could cause heatstroke. 
Heatstroke is a condition caused by the body overheating, 
usually as a result of prolonged exposure to or physical 
exertion in high temperatures (Leon & Bauchama, 2015). 
This most serious form of heat injury, heatstroke, can 
occur if the body temperature rises to 40 
oC or higher.  
 
Physical activity results in increased water requirements 
that parallel sweat losses for evaporative heat exchange 
(Sawka, Wenger & Pandolf,  1996). Survey data of 
individuals reporting ﬁ ve or more days of leisure time 
activity per week show higher median water intakes on 
the order of 0.5 L/d compared with their less-active 
counterparts (FNB, 2004).  The same activities in warmer 
environments would exacerbate the outcome. Figure 12.1 
depicts generalized modeling approximations for daily 
sweating rates as a function of daily metabolic rate 
(activity level) and air temperature. Water requirements 
can increase 2- to 6-fold from baseline by simple 
manipulation of either variable. For example, daily water 
requirements for any given energy expenditure in 
temperate climates (20°C) can triple in very hot weather 
(40°C) (Figure 12.2). In addition to air temperature, other 
environmental factors also modify sweat losses; these 
include relative humidity, air motion, solar load, and 
choice of clothing for protection against environmental 
elements. Therefore, it is expected that water losses, and 
therefore water needs, will vary considerably among 
moderately active people based on changing extraneous 
inﬂuences. 
 
Average Daytime Dry Bulb Temperature (OF)
Daily water Required (L/day)
59
15
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
20 25 30 35 40
68 77 86 95 104
Very Active
Low Active
Sedentary
Active
Average Daytime Dry Bulb Temperature (OC)
Minimal Daily H2O needs
Figure 12.2: Water needs estimated from sweat loss predictions due to changes in physical activity and air 
temperature 
Source: FNB (2004) 
199Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
12.3.2 Dietary factors 
 
12.3.2.1 Caffeine 
 
Caffeine is a natural alkaloid or xanthine alkaloid found in 
coffee beans, tea leaves,
 cocoa beans, cola nuts and other 
plants. It is one of the most widely used pharmacological 
substances in the world. Important sources of caff eine 
such as coffee, tea, cocoa, caffeinated soda and energy 
drinks are taken into the body by drinking and each of 
them has unique nutritional properties . It has long been 
thought that consumption of caff einated beverages, 
because of the diuretic effect of caffeine on reabsorption 
of water in the kidney, can lead to loss of body water. 
Caffeinated foods and beverages can have a diuretic 
effect by inhibiting the release o ff arginine vasopressin 
(Fredholm, 1984). Intake of < 250-300 mg of caff eine in 
acute doses (short-term high-level dose) is unlikely to 
have a measurable effect on urine output. However, side 
effects can be seen when ingestion exceeds more than 
300 mg (Maughan & Griffi n, 2003). A clinical trial by 
Maughan et al. (2016) also conﬁ rmed that there are no 
effects of moderate caff eine intake (96-212 mg) on net 
ﬂuid balance. 
 
In the review of coffee intake and its resources, Verster & 
Koenig (2018) reported that total daily caffeine intake has 
remained stable in the last 10-15 years, and coffee, tea and 
soft drinks are the most important caff eine sources. 
Consistently, according to data from National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) for 2007-2010, 
coffee remains main source of caff eine in adults. 
Meanwhile, based on NHMS (2014), as plain water was 
the most consumed daily beverage item among majority 
of Malaysian adults (98.2%), tea (0.7 times/day) and coffee 
(0.5 times/day) were the second and third most consumed 
beverages (IPH, 2015). Therefore, it can be concluded that 
tea and coff ee are main sources of caff eine among 
Malaysian adults. The highest potential for reducing daily 
caffeine intake is by limiting coffee consumption, and in 
some countries and age groups, by reducing tea and soft 
drink consumption (Verster & Koenig, 2018). 
 
Several countries such as Denmark, United Kingdom, 
Portugal, Canada, and United State of America (USA) 
advise to limit ca ffeine intake to 300 or 400 mg/day. In 
addition, food based dietary guidelines for Australia, 
Indonesia, New Zealand, Denmark, Hungary, Malta, 
Colombia, USA, and Canada state speciﬁ c concerns for 
energy drinks, generally deﬁned as any drink with > 150 
mg of caff eine/litter, but often contain other bioactive 
ingredients and sugar (McLellan & Lieberman, 2012; 
Rosenfeld & Mihalov, 2014). The European Food Safety 
Authority (EFSA) limit caffeine intake of 400 mg per day 
for adult because adult’s habitual caffeine consumption 
up to 400 mg per day does not give rise to safety concerns 
(EFSA,  2015).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
200 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
12.3.2.2 Alcohol 
 
Alcohol is not a nutrient but does provide energy to the 
body. One gram of alcohol contains approximately 7 kcal 
or 29 kJ per g (Wardlaw & Hampl
, 2007). Therefore, alcohol 
consumption has the potential to affect dietary intakes of 
nutrients. 
 
According to the recent NHMS 2019 (IPH, 2020), the 
current alcohol consumers make up 11.8% of the adult 
Malaysian population, which showed a slight increase in 
the prevalence of current drinkers compared to data from 
2015 (8.4%) (IPH, 2015). The proportion of binge drinking 
(six or more standard alcoholic drinks in one sitting) 
among current drinkers in Malaysia was 45.8%. In 
addition, 10% of those who regularly consume alcoholic 
beverages in Malaysia practice heavy episodic drinking 
(HED), which is deﬁ ned as consuming six or more 
standard alcoholic drinks in one sitting every week (IPH, 
2020). 
 
Alcohol, the active ingredient in alcoholic drinks has a 
diuretic eff ect that will increase ﬂ uid loss through 
urination. The mechanisms that explain alcohol e ffects 
diuresis are still not completely clear. Arginine 
vasopressine (AVP) plays an important role in hydration 
status by preventing swings in ﬂ uid balance to avoid 
dehydration and hyperhydration. In dehydrated state, AVP 
increases, triggered by increasing blood osmolality. 
Alcohol suppress AVP, independently of osmolality, 
resulting in an increased urine output (Eggleton, 1942; 
Saini et al., 1995). 
 
Therefore, for individuals who suffer from incontinene or 
need to pass urine frequently, it is recommended to avoid 
alcoholic beverages. Because of its diuretic eff ect, 
alcoholic beverages are not recommended to satisfy thirst 
or to be consumed as a rehydration ﬂuid. A study, which 
examined the effects of alcohol on hydration, has revealed 
that consumption of alcoholic beverages after physical 
exercise delays the normal return of plasma viscosity and 
this might be linked with the alcohol induced dehydration 
property (El-Sayed, 2001). Alcoholic beverages especially 
those containing 4% alcohol tend to delay the restoration 
of ﬂuid balance after exercise-induced dehydration 
(Shirreffs & Maughan, 1997). Therefore, alcoholic 
beverages should be completely avoided until one is fully 
hydrated from the dehydration state. 
 
 
12.3.2.3 Sodium intake 
 
Sodium is the principal cation in extracellular ﬂuid in the 
body and is an essential nutrient necessary for 
maintenance of plasma volume ,
 acid-base balance, 
transmission of nerve impulses and normal cell function 
(WHO, 2012). Sodium is the most important cation in 
regulation of ﬂuid and electrolyte balance in the body due 
to its abundance and osmotic pressure. Since all body 
ﬂuids are in chemical equilibrium, any change in sodium 
levels causes a compensatory shift in water, a ffecting 
plasma volume, blood pressure and intracellular and 
interstitial volumes.  
 
Total body water depends on the amount of sodium 
present in the extracellular space and the appropriate 
volume of water required to achieve isotonicity. As such, 
sodium ingestion is required for proper hydration and 
ﬂuid balance. It should be noted that when salty foods or 
ﬂuids are freely available, humans spontaneously exhibit 
a baseline level of sodium intake in excess of any 
immediate need. This elevated baseline salt ingestion is 
adequate for maintaining ﬂ uid balance under normal 
conditions, i.e., in the absence of signiﬁ cant sodium or 
ﬂuid loss (Stanhewicz & Kenney, 2015). 
 
Changes in sodium intake can inﬂuence serum or plasma 
levels of sodium, but the changes are relatively small and 
do not lead to pathological conditions, such as 
hyponatremia. When observed, hyponatremia is often 
caused by excessive sodium loss from the body, which 
occurs with impaired renal function, increased 
vasopressin release, or excessive consumption of water 
(Adrogué & Madias, 2012). 
 
 
12.3.3 Physiological factors 
 
There are several methods to establish water 
recommendations among populations.  Based on 
reviewed by V
ivanti (2012), water requirement 
estimations including ml/kg body weight, estimation by 
10 kg weight categories, ml/kcal (1 ml/kcal or 1.5 ml/kcal), 
surface area (ml/m
2) and percent of body weight. The 
earliest recommendation (RDA) for water came in the 
1945 prescription by the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) 
of the United States National Research Council. It was 
based on research at the time suggesting an intake of 1 ml 
of water for each calorie eaten (FNB, 1940). The RDA for 
water is a recommendation calculated to meet the needs 
of nearly all healthy individuals of each gender and life 
stage group. The RDAs are determined by using the 
Estimated Average Requirement (EAR) value and using 
the variability in the requirements among individuals to 
increase it to an amount that meets the needs of 97 to 
98% of healthy individuals. 
 
Then the RDA was expanded and was later known as 
Dietary Reference Intakes (DRI). The development of DRIs 
expands on the periodic reports of RDA, published from 
1941 to 1989 by the National Academy of Sciences. Age 
and gender speciﬁc AI for water were established in 2004 
(FNB, 2004). In the judgment of the Standing Committee 
of the Scientiﬁ c Evaluation of DRI, the adequate intake 
(AI) is expected to meet or exceed the amount needed to 
maintain a deﬁ ned nutritional state or criterion of 
adequacy in essentially all members of a speci ﬁc, 
apparently healthy, population. Examples of deﬁ ned 
nutritional states include normal growth, maintenance of 
normal circulating nutrient values, or other aspects of 
nutritional well-being or general health.  
 
Instead of ml/kcal, Holliday and Segar (1957) established 
formula of 35-45 ml/kg/day to estimate adult water 
requirements. They converted water requirement from 
ml/kcal into ml/kg for ease of use occurred for adults. This 
range is based on gender-speciﬁc estimated requirements 
rather than greater or lesser water need because of 
201Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
environmental or other factors. Chernoff  (1994) used 
additional formula proposing 30 ml/kg with a minimum 
of 1500 ml, but no source is provided for the reference. The 
ﬁgure of 35 ml/kg was sourced to Zeman (1991), where 35 
ml/kg is stated as the low end of the range for active 
young adults (35-40 ml/kg) and the high end of the range 
for average adults (30-35 ml/kg), but original sources are 
not offered (Vivanti, 2012). 
 Together with the available data on energy requirement 
in the Malaysian RNI 2017 (NCCFN, 2017) and the 
recommendation by the Food and Nutrition Board of the 
National Research Council (1945) which is 1 ml of water 
for each calorie eaten, the recommendation for water 
requirement for Malaysian could be established (Table 
12.1). 
 
Table 12.1: Calculation of water requirement according to RNI for adults 
RNI 2017 
(Energy1)
FNB 1945 
(1 ml/kcal) Glass2/day
Men 19-29 years 1960-2240 1960-2240 7.8-8.9 
30-59 years 1920-2190 1920-2190 7.7-8.8 
Women 19-29 years 1610-1840 1610-1840 6.4-7.4 
30-59 years 1660-1900 1660-1900 6.6-7.6
1  Energy requirement calculated based on RNI 2017 for Malaysia at PAL 1.4 and PAL 1.6; 
2 1 glass = 250 ml; 
Sources: FNB (1945); NCCFN (2017). 
Intake of water for adults in certain conditions such as 
temperature and exercise needs to be considered. Before 
the 1970s, athletes were advised not to drink during 
competitive events. However, research was published 
that focused on dehydration and stated that exercise 
weight loss greater than 2% could impair performance. 
Thus, drinking guideline was developed to prevent thirst, 
minimize weight loss and maintain performance (Roy, 
2013). According to Convertino et al. (1996), it is 
recommended that individuals drink about 500 ml (2 
glasses) of ﬂ uid about two hours before exercise to 
promote adequate hydration and allow time for excretion 
of excess ingested water. It is plausible to recommend a 
standardized ﬂuid replacement protocol for all people 
because numerous variables involved such as types of 
exercise, individual variability as well as environment. 
Therefore, Roy, (2013) had summarized and provided 
general principle in developing an individualized ﬂ uid 
replacement strategy. 
 
1. Before exercise, make sure adequately hydrated: 
 
a. Beverage consumption with meals will 
enhance ﬂuid replacement and pre 
exercise/ event hydration. 
 
b. Recovery from the previous exercise 
session should be 8 to 12 hours or more to 
enhance ﬂuid replacement.  
 
c. Tracking daily weight is helpful in 
evaluating hydration status because post 
exercise and day-to-day variations are 
likely from ﬂuid loss. Consider drinking 16 
to 20 ﬂ uid oz. (450 ml to 600 ml) 4 hours 
before exercise, especially if pre exercise 
weight is reduced. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. During exercise, drink according to your thirst 
sensation; no more or no less.  
 
a. Drinking more than 800 ml per hour is not 
recommended and may increase the risk 
for developing dilution hyponatremia.  
 
b. During extreme weather conditions, ﬂ uid 
intake and pace may require additional 
adjustment. 
 
c. For prolonged exercise (> 60 minutes), 
beverages containing 6 to 8% carbohydrate 
may provide additional beneﬁt. 
 
3. After exercise: 
 
a. Drink 16 to 24 oz. (450 to 720 ml) of ﬂuid for 
every pound (0.5 kg) lost. 
 
b. Post exercise meals should include ﬂ uid 
intake. 
 
 
 
202 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
12.4 Current status 
 
The Malaysian Adult Nutrition Survey (MANS) 2014 measured daily consumption of plain water and they 
reported that Malaysian consistently reached 6.7-7.3 servings or glasses (1 glass = 250 ml) per day (IPH, 2014). 
Meanwhile, the NHMS 2015 reported that the percentage of adequate plain water intake (≥ 6 glasses per day) 
among Malaysian adults was 72.9% (IPH, 2015). However, NHMS 2019 reported that adequate plain water intake 
was increased to 74.2% (IPH, 2020). For other beverages, tea (70.3%) remained as the most consumed, followed 
by malted drink 59.1% and coffee 53.2% (Noraida et al., 2015).   
  
In small scale study by Azlan et al. (2012) found that 79% of their subjects drank 5 to 12 glasses of water a day. 
Among the subjects, 73%, 14.8%, and 11.9% consumed tap water, bottled mineral water, and bottled drinking 
water, respectively. The reasons for consuming bottled water include safety, health, quality, and taste. The 
results also showed that the subjects perceived low to acceptable qualities for tap water, while bottled drinking 
water and mineral were perceived as having relatively higher quality.  
 
 
12. 5 Key Recommendations  
 
Key Recommendation 1 
 
Drink six to eight glasses (1.5-2.0 liter) of plain water daily. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. Drink one to two glasses of plain water during and between main meals. 
 
2.
Drink plain water at all the times even when you are not thirsty. 
 
3. Drink additional two glasses of plain water when engaging with physical activity or in hot and humid 
environments. 
 
4. If you are fasting, drink two glasses of plain water during sahur, two glasses while breaking fast and 
another two to four glasses along the night. 
 
 
Key Recommendation 2 
 
Maintain ﬂuid intake from other food sources. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. Continue intake of other 
ﬂuid sources such as soups, beverages and juices, preferably low in sugar, salt 
and fat. 
 
2. Reduce intake of caffeinated beverage. 
 
3. Avoid taking alcoholic drink as source of water. 
 
 
203Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
12.6 References 
 
Adrogué HJ & Madias NE (2012). The challenge of hyponatremia. J Am Soc Nephrol 23(7):1140-1148. doi: 
10.1681/ASN.2012020128. 
 
Amstrong LE & Johnson EC (2018).  Water intake, water balance, and the elusive daily water requirement.  
Nutrients 10(12):1928. doi: 10.3390/nu10121928. 
 
Azlan A, Khoo, HK, Mohd Aizat I, Ismail A & Muhammad R (2012). Consumption patterns and perception on 
intake of drinking water in Klang Valley, Malaysia. Pak J Nutr 11:584-590. doi: 10.3923/pjn.2012.584.590.   
 
Chernoff  R (1994). Meeting the nutritional needs of the elderly in the institutional setting. Nutr Rev 52:132-136. 
 
Convertino VA, Armstrong LE, Coyle EF, Mack GW, Sawka MN, Senay Jr LC & Sherman WM (1996). American 
College of Sports Medicine position stand. Exercise and ﬂuid replacement. Med Sci Sports Exerc 28:i–
vii. 
 
Daud WRW, Sarker MNH & Talib MZM (2000). Drying characteristics of Malaysian padi. Pertanika J Sci & Technol 
8(1):105-115. 
 
EFSA (2015). Scientiﬁc opinion on the safety of caffeine. NDA Panel (EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition 
and Allergies). EFSA J 13:4102. doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2015.4102. 
 
Eggleton MG (1942). The diuretic action of alcohol in man. J Physiol 101(2):172-191. 
doi:10.1113/jphysiol.1942.sp003973. 
 
El-Sayed MS (2001). Adverse e ffects of alcohol ingestion post exercise on blood rheological variables during 
recovery. Clin Hemorheol Microcirc 24(4):227-232. 
 
FNB (1940). Recommended Dietary Allowances. National Academy Press, Washington DC. 
 
FNB (1945). Recommended Dietary Allowances. National Academy Press, Washington DC. 
 
FNB (2004). Dietary Reference Intakes: Water, Potassium, Sodium, Chloride, and Sulfate. National Academy Press, 
Washington DC. 
 
Fredholm BB (1984). Cardiovascular and renal actions of methylxanthines. Prog Clin Biol Res 158:303-330.  
 
Grandjean AC,  Reimers KJ & Buyckx ME (2003). Hydration: Issues for the 21st Century. Nutr Rev 61 (8):261-271. 
 
Holliday AM & Segar WE (1957). The maintenance and need for water in parenteral ﬂ uid 
therapy. Pediatrics  19:823-832. 
 
 IPH (2014). National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS) 2014: Malaysian Adult Nutrition Survey (MANS). 
Vol. II: Survey Findings. Institute for Public Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
IPH (2015). National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS) 2015. Vol. II: Non-Communicable Diseases, Risk 
Factors & Other Health Problems. Institute for Public Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur.  
 
IPH (2017). National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS) 2017: Adolescent and Nutrition Survey. Institute for 
Public Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
IPH (2020). National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS) 2019: Non-Communicable Diseases: Risk Factors 
and Other Health Problems. Vol. I: NCDs. Institute for Public Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Selangor. 
 
IOM (2014). Caffeine in Food and Dietary Supplements: Examining Safety. Workshop Summary. Institute of 
Medicine. The National Academies Press, Washington, DC. 
 
Leon LR, Bouchama A (2015).  Heat stroke. Compr Physiol 5:611-647. 
 
Makaremi N, Salleh E, Jaafar MZ & Hoseini AHG (2012). Thermal comfort conditions of shaded outdoor spaces 
in hot and humid climate of Malaysia. Build Environ 48:7-14. 
 
204 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Maughan RJ & Griffin J (2003). Caffeine ingestion and ﬂuid balance: A review. J Hum Nutr Diet. 16(6):411-420. 
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-277x.2003.00477.x.  
 
Maughan RJ, Watson P, Cordery PAA, Walsh NP, Oliver SJ, Dolci A, Rodriguez-Sanchez N & Galloway S (2016). 
A randomized trial to assess the potential of different beverages to affect hydration status: Development 
of a beverage hydration index. Am J Clin Nutr 103(3):717–723. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.115.114769. 
 
McLellan TM & Lieberman HR (2012). Do energy drinks contain active components other than caffeine? Nutr 
Rev 70:730-744. 
 
MOH (1985). Malaysian Food Act 1983 and Food Regulation 1985. Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
 
Mora-Rodriguez R, Ortega JF, Fernandez-Elias VE, Kapsokefalou M, Malisova O, Athanasatou A, Husemann M, 
Domnik K & Braun H (2016). Inﬂuence of physical activity and ambient temperature on hydration: the 
European Hydration Research Study (EHRS). Nutrients 8:252:1-13. 
 
Noraida MK, Mohamad HA, Balkish MN & Azli B (2015). Changes in food choices among Malaysian adults: A 
comparison between Malaysian Adults Nutrition Survey (MANS) 2003 and MANS 2014. Med J Malaysia 
70(1). 
 
NCCFN (2017).  Recommended Nutrient Intake: A Report of the Technical Working Group on Nutritional 
Guidelines. National Coordinating Committee on Food and Nutrition, Ministry of Health Malaysia, 
Putrajaya. 
 
Parsons K (2002). Human Thermal Environments: The E ffects of Hot, Moderate, and Cold Environments on 
Human Health, Comfort, and Performance. 3rd ed. Pp. 39. CRC Press.  
 
Reyes CM & Cornelis MC (2018). Ca ffeine in the diet: Country-level consumption and guidelines. Nutrients 
10(11):1772. 
 
Rosenfeld LS, Mihalov JJ, Carlson SJ & MattiaA (2014). Regulatory status of caffeine in the United States. Nutr 
Rev 72:23-33. 
 
Roy BA (2013). Exercise and ﬂuid replacement. ACSMs Health Fit J 17(4):3. doi: 10.1249/FIT.0b013e318296bc4b. 
 
Saini J, Boisvert P, Spiegel K, Candas V & Brandenberger G (1995). Inﬂ uence of alcohol 
on the hydromineral hormone responses to exercise in a warm environment. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup 
Physiol 72(1-2):32-6. doi:10.1007/BF00964111. 
 
Sawka M, Wenger C & Pandolf K (1996). Thermoregulatory responses to acute exercise-heat stress and heat 
acclimation. In: Fregly M, Blatteis C (Eds.). Handbook of Physiology. Section 4: Environmental Physiology. 
Vol. 1. Pp. 157-185. Oxford University Press, New York. 
 
Shirreffs SM & Maughan RJ (1997). Restoration of ﬂuid balance after exerciseinduced dehydration: Effects of 
alcohol consumption. J Appl Physiol 83(4):1152-1158. 
 
Stanhewicz AE & Kenney WL (2015). Determinants of water and sodium intake and output, Nutr Rev 73(2):73-
82. 
 
Verster JC & Koenig J (2018). Caffeine intake and its sources: A review of national representative studies. Crit 
Rev Food Sci Nutr 58(8):1250-1259. doi:10.1080/10408398.2016.1247252.  
 
Vivanti AP (2012). Origins for the estimations of water requirements in adults. Eur J Clin Nutr 66(12):1282-1289. 
doi: 10.1038/ejcn.2012.157. 
 
Wardlaw GM & Hampl JS (2007). Perspectives in Nutrition. 7th ed. Pp. 271-290. Mc Graw Hill, New York. 
 
WHO (2012). Guideline: Sodium Intake for Adults and Children. World Health Organization (WHO), Geneva. 
 
Zeman FJ (1991). Clinical Nutrition and Dietetics. 2
nd ed. Macmillan Publishing 
Company, NewYork. 
 
205Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
KEY 
MESSAGE
13
Consume safe and  
clean foods and beverages
13.1 Terminology 
206 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Clean foods and beverages  
 
Clean foods and beverages are food and water that 
are free from dirt, stains or impurities; unsoiled
, free 
from foreign matter or pollution; unadulterated and 
not infected. 
 
Cross contamination 
  
Cross contamination is the transfer of harmful 
microorganisms from one item of food to another 
via a non-food surface such as human hands, 
equipment or utensils. It may also be a direct 
transfer from raw food to cooked food. 
 
F
ood and water borne diseases 
 
Food and water borne diseases are any diseases 
resulting from the consumption of contaminated 
food and drinking water
. Most cases are actually 
food infection caused by a variety of food borne 
pathogenic bacteria, viruses and parasites. 
 
Food poisonings 
  
Food poisonings are syndromes acquired as a 
result of ingesting contaminated foods,
 which are 
foods that contain infectious, toxigenic 
microorganisms or noxious elements. 
 
Fresh foods 
 
Fresh foods are raw food that have not changed 
colour,
 do not have unpleasant odour, not withered 
and texture remain unchanged. 
 
Safe foods and beverages 
 
Safe foods and beverages is an assurance of the 
food and water against chemical,
 biological or 
physical conditions, which may expose the user to 
food borne illnesses.  
 
 
 
 
1313
KEY MESSAGE
CONSUME SAFE AND CLEAN 
FOODS AND BEVERAGES
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Hasnah Haron, Ms. Norhidayah Othman, Dr. Nurul Huda Razali and  
Dr. Fadhilah Jailani
207Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Potentially hazardous foods 
 
Potentially hazardous foods are generally moist, nutrient-rich foods with a neutral pH. Examples of foods that are 
normally considered potentially hazardous include raw and undercooked poultry or other products of animal origin,
 
eggs, dairy products and fresh fruits and vegetables. 
13.2. Introduction 
Food borne diseases are deﬁ ned as diseases, usually 
either infectious or toxic in nature, caused by hazards that 
enter the body through the ingestion of food. These 
include biological hazards such as infectious bacteria, 
toxin producing organism, moulds, parasites and viruses, 
chemical hazard such as natural toxins, food additives, 
pesticide residues, veterinary drug residues, 
environmental contaminants and allergens as well as 
physical hazard such as metal, glass, stone and bone 
chips (WHO, 2020). The contamination of food may occur 
at any stage in the process from the food production to 
consumption. It can also result from environmental 
contamination including pollution of water, soil and air. 
These diseases are cholera, typhoid fever, hepatitis A, 
dysentery and food poisoning and mainly related to poor 
sanitation. It may lead to permanent health problems and 
disability (Sharifa Ezat, Neety & Sangaran, 2013). 
Deﬁnitions of each food borne disease are simpli ﬁed in 
Table 13.1. 
Food borne diseases remain a real and formidable 
problem in both developed and developing countries, 
causing great human suff ering and impede 
socioeconomic development by straining health care 
systems, and harming national economies, tourism and 
trade (WHO, 2020). The report by WHO global burden on 
food borne diseases stated that diarrhoeal disease agents 
were the most frequent causes of food borne diseases, 
particularly Norovirus and Campylobacter spp. Food 
borne diarrhoeal disease agents caused 230,000 deaths, 
particularly non-typhoidal Salmonella enterica, which 
causes diarrhoeal and invasive disease (WHO, 2015). 
Pathogens such as rotavirus, Shigella, Shiga-toxin 
producing E. coli and Cryptosporidium contribute to most 
of the burden of diarrhoea in developing countries (Kotloff, 
2017). Other major causes of food borne deaths were 
Salmonella typhi, Taenia solium, hepatitis A virus, and 
aﬂatoxin (WHO, 2015). 
 
DefinitionTypes food borne disease
Food poisoning Acute onset of vomiting and/ or diarrhoea and/ or other symptoms 
associated with ingestion of food. May also presented with neurological 
symptoms such as paraesthesia, motor weakness and cranial nerve 
palsies. 
 
Cholera Acute severe watery diarrhoea with or without vomiting. 
 
Typhoid/ paratyphoid An illness with prolonged fever, constitutional symptoms (malaise, 
headache, anorexia) and hepatosplenomegaly. 
 
Hepatitis A Acute illness typically including acute jaundice, dark urine, anorexia, 
malaise and extreme fatigue. 
 
Dysentery Acute diarrhoea with visible blood in the stool. 
Table 13.1: Definition of each food borne disease 
Adapted from 10th revision of the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems 
(ICD 10)  
Source: WHO (2004)  
208 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
In Malaysia, the food borne cases are underestimated 
because most of the incidences were not reported and a 
lot of procedures are required before the case can be 
brought to the authority (Soon, Singh & Baines, 2011). Not 
all the food borne disease victims seek treatment at 
hospitals or clinics. Therefore, only part of them receive 
appropriate medical treatment and are reported by public 
health authorities. The main contributing factor to food 
borne diseases in Malaysia was identiﬁed as unsanitary 
food handling procedures which accounted for more than 
50% of the poisoning episodes (Salleh et al., 2017). 
 
There were 60 episodes of food poisoning from 2,325 
cases reported with 47 of the food poisoning episodes 
involving schools and institutions under the Ministry of 
Education. Food poisoning incidents at schools have 
increased 57% from 30 in 2015 to 45 in 2016 (MOH, 2017). 
Most of the incidences involved the school canteens and 
kitchens. Factors that contributed to the food poisoning 
were contaminated raw materials, cross contamination 
during handling, food that was prepared too early before 
serving as well as temperature abuse during processing, 
transportation, sales and storage (Salleh et al., 2017). 
Apart from that, urbanisation has increased urban 
population and changed the lifestyles of the population. 
Eating out trend has become something common to the 
Malaysian population. Many of the food premises use 
roads outside their premises as eating areas at night 
despite the food cleanliness issue (Ali & Abdullah, 2012). 
As the diversity of immigrant workers have increased and 
more numbers of ethnic restaurants have newly operated, 
the correct food handling practices must be practiced to 
ensure the food consumed is safe (Rajagopal, 2013). 
 
Food handlers are the most common source of 
contamination because they can spread harmful 
organisms by means of faecal-oral route or skin lesions, 
as well as unclean kitchen utensils or kitchen counters 
(Linscott, 2011). They play a major role in the prevention 
of food poisoning during food preparation; hence, food 
handler training is seen as one of the main strategies to 
increase food safety practices (Soon, Singh & Baines, 
2011). It is important to continuously inform food handlers 
about good hygiene practices at all stages of the 
production chain. 
 
It is also important to educate consumers to consume safe 
and clean food and beverages. Sometimes consumers 
give prioritisation on the low price of the food that they 
purchased instead of the hygiene level of the food 
premises. This will convince food handlers that as long as 
the price for their meal is cheap, they do not have to be 
concerned about food safety. Consumers could always 
avoid getting food borne illness by choosing the right food 
and the right place to dine. Grades of food premises will 
help consumers by giving an overview of the level of 
hygiene and sanitation of the food premise (Abdul 
Mutalib et al., 2015).   
 
Food Regulations 1985 have been published in Malaysia 
to protect the public against health hazards and fraud in 
the preparation and sale. This act and regulations help to 
ensure safe food and beverage consumption in food 
outlets and premises. The Ministry of Health Malaysia has 
also established the Food Handlers’ Training Programme 
since 1996 as to increase the knowledge on food hygiene. 
This knowledge is very useful to ensure the handling, 
preparation and sales of food have been done in 
209Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
appropriate ways. Thus, to ensure the training is effective 
and has the long term eff ect and impact, continuous 
improvement is needed. Malaysia authority classiﬁes food 
premises according to their level of cleanliness. Grades 
like A, B, C and D or “no grade” have been applied to 
categorize food premises based on their level of 
sanitation. Several aspects that determine the grades 
including location, water supply, pest control, ventilation, 
food storage, toilet room, food handlers’ clothing and 
health condition, food preparation, temperature, and so 
forth (MOH, 2009).  
 
In terms of the intervention strategies for food safety in 
Malaysia, the National Food Safety and Nutrition Council 
was established and approved on the 21st March 2001. It 
provides the advice related to food safety and nutrition in 
the country. The Food Safety and Quality Division (FSQD) 
has been established to plan, implement, monitor and 
evaluate all the food safety and quality programmes at all 
levels that include national, state, districts, entry points 
and local authorities. For the surveillance purpose, the 
analysis of the related food samples are carried out by the 
Food Laboratory Section, a programme under FQSD, 
MOH. Other activities that strengthen the surveillance 
system are the Food Safety Information System of 
Malaysia (FOSIM) that functions in managing food safety 
surveillance that ensures imported foods can be eaten 
safely (Salleh et al., 2017).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
There are many reasons for the lack of impact of training 
initiatives and the implementation of safe food handling 
practices within the food service industry. The possible 
factors such as; the staff  high revenue, the staff  small 
wages, the staff position, more part-time staff working, the 
low language level and/ or educational level of the staff , 
less awareness on quality assurance, lot of complicated 
meals served, fulﬁlling high demands and short period of 
serving/ preparing most of the foods at mealtimes, 
culinary requirements for the current trend, the high 
quantity of vulnerable consumers been provisioned, less 
knowledge on food safety, inappropriate placement of 
equipment and the rotation of staff. The positive impact 
from the training can be enhanced by monitoring the food 
handlers that are involved in their contributions in 
decreasing the food borne outbreaks incidence rate (Soon 
et al., 2011). 
 
While education and regulation are crucial for continuous 
food safety, ignoring an inadequate infrastructure can 
undermine public health initiatives. The basic 
infrastructure for maintaining food safety should include 
proper access to waste facilities and water supply, 
presence of sanitary and proper waste management, and 
regular monitoring and supervision by authorities 
(Cortese et al., 2015). It is recommended that in order to 
prevent and control food borne disease, inter-agency 
involvement, in particular agencies are responsible for the 
provision of basic environmental facilities, and local 
authorities need to play an important role in enforcing 
laws related to establishment and operations of food 
outlets. Continuous collaboration between government 
and private sectors are crucial for a sustainable 
improvement for a better health of the nation. 
210 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
13.3 Scientiﬁc basis 
Consumer education to promote safe food consumption 
can be the best way of reducing the risk of food borne 
diseases at the consumer end of the food chain. The World 
Health Organization has introduced the Five Keys to Safer 
Food which incorporates all the messages of the Ten 
Golden Rules for Safe Food Preparation (WHO, 2006). The 
Five Keys are stated as in Figure 13.3. 
 
The core concept remains the same and the information 
provided in the Five Keys to Safer Food Manual are 
adapted in our country. The Five Keys to Safer Food by 
WHO (2006) and articles published have been used as the 
basis or rationale for the proposed key recommendations 
namely; practice good personal hygiene, choose safe and 
clean foods and beverages, serve food at appropriate 
temperature, prepare food hygienically, cook food 
thoroughly, hold foods appropriately and choose safe and 
clean premises when eating out or getting from outside. 
 
Establishing a good personal hygiene routine when 
handling foods could protect consumers from becoming 
sick from the illness-causing germs and hand washing is 
one of the important personal hygiene habits to be 
observed. Consumers are encouraged to always wash 
their hands using soap during food preparation and eating 
foods. In a systematic review on 22 randomized controlled 
trials reported by Ejemot-Nwadiaro et al. (2015), it was 
concluded that hand washing promotion may reduce the 
incidence of diarrhoea in children and adults by about 
30%. In other words, hand washing can help to reduce the 
risk of food borne diseases.  
  
According to WHO (2008), consumers are encouraged to 
monitor the expiry date, be alert on the adulteration of 
food when choosing and buying food. Raw and cooked 
food should be stored separately at all stages of the food 
handling process. This is to prevent cross contamination 
due to the spread of harmful pathogens from foods, hands, 
utensils, or food preparation surfaces to another food that 
can cause food poisoning. Insects, rodents and pests play 
a role in the transmission of food borne diseases. Hence, 
it is important to ensure that all the food products are well 
protected and be free from insects, rodents and pests to 
avoid the spread of food-borne pathogens. In addition, 
safe water consumption is important to ensure good 
health. Among all methods to make water safe to drink, 
boiling is the assured method that can kill disease-
causing organisms including viruses, bacteria and 
parasites. However, in an emergency situation where 
water is contaminated with fuel or toxic chemicals, water 
will not be made safe to consume by boiling. In this 
situation, bottled water is the safest choice for drinking 
and cooking and washing (CDC, 2020). 
  
Consumers also need to properly wash the raw material, 
equipment using clean and safe water because 
dangerous microorganisms are widely found in soil, water, 
animals and people. These microorganisms can also be 
carried on hands, wiping cloths and utensils. Furthermore, 
food cannot be exposed to room temperature more than 
two hours. This is due to the fact that the number of 
microbes multiplied within this duration is high enough 
to cause food borne disease (WHO, 2008). 
  
All cooked foods should be cooked thoroughly in order to 
prevent food contamination. Food that has been cooked 
should be held at a safe temperature (less than 5 °C or 
more than 60 °C). Holding food at these safe temperatures 
ranges will slow or stop the growth of microorganisms 
(WHO, 2008). On the other hand, maintaining food in the 
danger zone from 5°C to 60°C, can cause microorganisms 
to multiply very quickly (FAO, 2007). Improper holding 
temperature of food is the number one contributing factor 
that leads to food borne disease because spore forming 
bacteria like Clostridium botulinum, Clostridium 
perfringens and Bacillus cereus can still survive cooking 
temperatures. Foods, especially potentially hazardous 
food such as minced meats, rolled roasts, large joints of 
meat and whole poultry need to be properly cooked to a 
temperature of 70°C to kill almost all dangerous 
microorganisms (WHO, 2008). Any food that needs 
reheating, must be reheated to reach an internal 
temperature of 74°C within two hours to prevent the 
number of organisms reaching levels that can cause food 
borne illness (BC Cook Articulation Committee, 2015). 
 
When deciding where to buy food and eating out, 
consumers are encouraged to make a visual check of the 
staff, cutlery and other equipment used for cleanliness and 
tidiness. It is being emphasized that personal hygiene for 
people who work in the food premises should be given 
priority to make sure that consumers can have safe food. 
Practising good personal hygiene will promote clean 
premises in the food establishment. This is also a good 
indicator of hygiene standards (WHO, 2008). 
 
211Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
13.4 Current status 
Control and prevention of diseases related to food and 
water through mandatory notiﬁcation of those diseases is 
monitored under the Prevention and Control of 
Communicable Disease Act 1988 (MOH, 1988). The 
diseases under surveillance were typhoid, cholera, 
dysentery, Hepatitis A and food poisoning. 
 
  
Report from Ministry of Health Malaysia (MOH, 2017) from 
2011 to 2017, the food and waterborne disease (FWBD) 
incidences showing a downward trend except in 2015, 
with an increasing trend for most of FWBD. The 2017 
report revealed that there was an increasing trend for 
typhoid and hepatitis A incidence and a downward trend 
for cholera and dysentery incidence as shown in Figure 
13.1. 
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Typhoid
Cholera
Dysentery
Hepatitis A
Incidence/ Year 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Typhoid 0.95 0.75 0.73 0.7 1.39 0.51 0.58 
Cholera 1.91 0.96 0.58 0.45 0.79 0.52 0.01 
Dysentery 0.22 0.29 0.28 0.27 0.39 0.38 0.37 
Hepatitis A 1.42 1.58 0.48 0.21 0.34 0.23 0.47 
Figure 13.1: Trend of incidence of typhoid, cholera, hepatitis A and dysentery in Malaysia, 2011 to 2017 
Source: MOH (2017) 
 
13.4.1 Typhoid  
  
Typhoid incidence rate in 2017 increased slightly compared to 2016,
 contributed by high case incidence in Sabah, 
Kelantan, Selangor and Perak. Most cases of typhoid in Sabah were reported to occur in sea village settlements due to 
lack of clean water supply and sanitary facilities. Kelantan recorded six outbreak episodes in 2017. The risk of typhoid 
infection still exists because most wells in the Kelantan are still unsanitary despite well chlorination activities being 
carried out. Typhoid outbreaks in Wilayah Persekutuan Kuala Lumpur and areas around Selangor in 2015 were mainly 
contributed by food handlers who failed to comply with food hygiene practices. 
 
13.4.2 Cholera  
 
Cholera incidence in Sabah showed a cyclical trend where it peaked every 4 to 5 years. However,
 in 2017 the incidence 
rate declined abruptly with only two cases reported in Sabah, as compared to 170 cases in 2016. This was a result of 
prevention activities including prophylaxis in areas affected by the outbreak in 2016 in Sabah. Main risk factors include 
access to insanitary water supply, poor hygiene and sanitation and the practice of consuming contaminated seaweed 
such as latok which is collected from the same area where sewage effluents are discharged. 
  
212 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
13.4.3 Dysentery  
 
Dysentery has always been under notiﬁed disease due to incomplete information to fulﬁl case deﬁnition criteria. In 2017, 
the incidence rate of dysentery slightly reduced to 0.37 per 100,000 populations from 0.38 per 100,000 population in 
2016. 
 
13.4.4
Hepatitis A  
 
Hepatitis A outbreaks are commonly associated with unsafe water supply and poor sanitation. Orang Asli
 communities 
were frequently affected with small outbreaks because of unsafe water supply. However, for 2015 to 2017, there were 
no OA communities affected with hepatitis A. The incidence of Hepatitis A in 2017 has increased to 0.47 per 100,000 
populations compared to 0.23 per 100,000 population in 2016 with two outbreak episodes in Sabah which contributed 
to the increase in cases of hepatitis A throughout the country. 
 
13.4.5 Food poisoning  
 
The incidence rate of food poisoning per 100,000 population has decreased to 42.25 in 2017 compared to 56.62 in 2016 
as in Figure 13.2. This ﬁgure is within the 5-year median rates for food poisoning which is 49.79 per 100,000 population. 
The total episode of food poisoning has also decreased to 404 episodes as compared to 526 episodes in 2016. 
The total 
episodes of food poisoning involving schools in 2017 have also decreased to 181 episodes as compared to 257 episodes 
in 2016. In 2017, from a total of 404 episodes of food poisoning nationwide, 181 (44.8%) episodes took place in the 
Ministry of Education’s (MOE) schools. This represents an increase of 21.13% from food poisoning episodes in 2016 at 
MOE school canteens and hostel kitchens.  
0 100 200 300 400 500 600
2017
2011
Total Episode Incidence Rate per 100,000 population
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
Year 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Total episode 434 454 495 501 409 526 404  
 
Incidence rate per 57.06 44.23 47.79 58.65 47.45 56.62 42.25  
100,000 population  
Figure 13.2: Trend total episode and incidence rate of food poisoning in Malaysia, 2011 to 2017 
Source: MOH (2017) 
 
Food poisoning associated with 1Malaysia Milk Program (PS1M) has markedly reduced from 96 episodes in 2011 to four 
episodes in 2017. Continuous monitoring of PS1M along the supply chain and supplier’s compliance to Standard 
Operating Procedures set by the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Education has signiﬁ cantly improved the 
management of PS1M. 
 
213Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
13.4.6 Mortality associated with food water borne disease 
Deaths due to Food Water Borne Disease are largely 
preventable. Mortality is commonly associated with delay 
in seeking treatment,
 toxicity of causative agents such as 
marine toxin and the presence of other comorbid medical 
conditions. Case Fatality Rate (CFR) has been reduced to 
0.08 in 2013 to 0.03 in 2017. 
 
Law enforcement in infectious disease control has gained 
momentum in Malaysia with the rise in focused 
enforcement activities. Enforcement in this area includes 
inspection of nurseries that have been identiﬁ ed as 
harbouring infectious disease. Whenever food poisoning, 
hand, foot and mouth disease, Leptospirosis or other 
infectious diseases are notiﬁed to a District Health Office, 
premise inspection will be carried out by authorized 
officers.  
Even though 1,919 premises were inspected in the year 
2017 compared to 7672 premises in 2016 as in Table 13.2, 
yet the ratio of premises given closure order has risen in 
2017. This indicates a focused enforcement activity under 
this Act.  This was partly due to the positive outcome of 
the inspection of food premises on a routine basis and the 
enforcement actions taken such as closure of unhygienic 
food premises. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 13.2: Enforcement of Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases Act, 1988 
Year Premise inspected Premise Closure
2015 8,737 275 
2016 7,672 555 
2017 1,919 461 
Source: MOH (2017) 
 
Since the control and prevention of diseases related to food and water are an essential component to safeguard the 
consumers, thus it is important to continue efforts by various stakeholders to promote the importance of consuming 
safe foods and beverages.  
214 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
13.5 Key Recommendations 
 
Key Recommendation 1 
 
Practice good personal hygiene.  
 
How to 
Achieve 
 
1. K
eep ﬁngernail short and clean, wear clean clothing and restrain hair while handling food.  
 
2. Wash hands well with soap and water before handling food and during food preparation, giving attention 
to areas between ﬁngers and ﬁngernails (Figure 13.4).  
 
3. Dry hands thoroughly after washing, by using a clean towel, a paper towel or an electric hand dryer.  
 
4. Handle food with clean utensils rather than bare hands as much as possible.  
 
5. Cover cuts, wounds or burns with clean bandages and gloves when handling food.  
 
6. Avoid direct contact with food preparation if suffering from a foodborne disease.  
 
 
Key Recommendation 2 
 
Choose safe,
 clean foods and beverages 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. Select fresh,
 clean and wholesome foods.  
 
a) Fruits and vegetables must be fresh and reasonably free from insects. 
 
b) Fish with ﬁ rm and elastic ﬂesh, bright, clear and not sunken eyes, red gills and not of smelly odour.  
 
c) Meat and poultry must be fresh with ﬁrm and elastic ﬂesh, not bruised, not slimy and no foul 
smell. 
 
d) Eggs with clean and uncracked shells and not expired. 
 
e) Dried food such as rice, cereal, ﬂour and legumes are not moist or wet, not rotten and contain no 
insects or foreign substances. 
 
 
2. Choose processed foods that are appropriately sealed and labeled.  
 
a) Choose cans that are not rusted, not dented, not bulging or not leaking. 
 
b) Choose foods (milk and fruit juice) that are processed for safety such as pasteurised, Ultra High 
Temperature and sterilised. 
 
c) Check the expiry date of processed food before purchasing and always read the label for storage 
instructions. Do not use food beyond its expiry date. 
 
3. Purchase cold and frozen foods last when shopping and return home as soon as possible to avoid 
spoilage. Try to use cooler boxes or bags during transportation. 
 
4. Use clean, safe and treated water.  
 
5. Boil tap water for drinking.  
 
215Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Key Recommendation 3 
 
Store foods appropriately. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. Store foods at the appropriate area and temperatures. K
eep the area clean and orderly. 
 
2. Foods should be properly covered and placed in containers or wrapped to avoid contact between raw 
and prepared foods. Stored food to be frozen in a closed container for single usage.  
 
3. Store unripe fruits at room temperature or in a cool, dry place. Ripen fruits and fresh vegetables are kept 
in the refrigerator.    
 
4. Keep perishable foods like meat, poultry and seafood in the freezer compartment while milk, yogurt and 
eggs in the chiller, as soon as possible upon returning home. Do not overload on storing food in the 
refrigerator as it leads to poor cold air circulation.  
 
5. Do not keep very hot food in the refrigerator, as this will cause the temperature of the refrigerator to rise.  
 
6. Store cooked foods and/ or meal leftovers in the chiller within two hours after cooking and do not keep 
them for longer than two days. If you like to keep these foods longer, deep freeze them. Frozen food can 
be kept for three months in a standard home freezer. 
 
7. Store dried food such as rice, cereal, ﬂour and legumes in a sealed container and placed in a cool, dry place, 
away from direct heat or sunlight. Regularly inspect for insect infestation.  
 
8. Store foods away from chemical products, pesticides and cleaning agents.  
 
9. Protect kitchen areas and food from insects, pests and other animals by keeping the kitchen and 
surrounding areas cleaned.  
 
 
Key Recommendation 4 
 
Prepare food hygienically 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. W
ash thoroughly fruits and vegetables that are to be eaten raw with safe and clean water.  
 
2. Do not thaw frozen food at room temperature but do it in the refrigerator or under clean running water.  
 
3. Do not refreeze thawed food.  
 
4. Keep fruits and vegetables separate from raw meat, poultry and seafood while preparing.  
 
5. Wash all surfaces, crockery, cutlery, cooking utensils and other equipment used for food preparation.  
 
6. It is a good practice to separate equipment and utensils such as knives and cutting boards for handling 
raw foods and cooked foods. Make sure to wash the cutting board with soap prior to using it to cut other 
types of food. 
 
7. Change cloth towels daily or after every meal prepared with raw meat and poultry. It is recommended 
to use paper towels for this purpose as well.  
 
8. Keep appliances such as microwave ovens, toasters, can openers, blender and mixer blades free of 
residual food particles.  
 
 
216 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Key Recommendation 5 
 
Cook food thoroughly. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. F
oods must be cooked thoroughly, especially meat, poultry, eggs and seafood.   
 
2. Bring foods like soups and stews to boiling. For meat and poultry, make sure that juices are clear and not 
pink.  
 
3. Reheat cooked food thoroughly.  
 
4. Do not reheat foods more than once.  
 
 
Key Recommendation 6 
 
Serve food at appropriate temperature. 
 
How to 
Achieve 
 
1. Serve cooked foods as soon as possible in crockery that are clean and in good condition (not crack or 
chip). If you need to hold food
, keep them appropriately covered and never leave the cooked foods at room 
temperature for more than two hours.  
 
2. Serve hot foods at temperature above 60 °C while cold foods at temperature below 5 °C.  
 
 
Key Recommendation 7  
 
Choose safe and clean premises when eating out or buying food from outside. 
 
How to 
Achieve 
 
1. Choose premises that are clean and tidy: 
 
a)
located far away from street, rubbish dumps, clogged drains, septic tanks or waste disposals. 
 
b) with running pipe water, proper drainage system, and covered rubbish bins. 
 
c) free from signs or presence of pets, rodents, pests and insects. 
 
2. Choose premises that use crockery, cutlery and utensils that are clean and in good condition and use 
them in the correct way.  
 
3. Choose premises that serve appropriately covered foods and beverages.  
 
4. Choose premises where the staff practise good personal hygiene and habits at work such as wearing a 
hair restraint (hat or hair net).  
 
5. Choose premises which display certi ﬁcates (on the wall) such as BeSS (Clean, Safe and Healthy), A Grade, 
Food Handler Training or any related certiﬁcate.  
 
217Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
13.6 References 
 
Abdul Mutalib, NA, Syaﬁnaz AN & Sakai K, Shirai Y (2015). An overview of food borne illness and food safety in 
Malaysia. Int Food Res J 22(3):896-901. 
 
Ali N & Abdullah MA (2012). The food consumption and eating behaviour of Malaysian urbanites: Issues and 
concerns. GMJSS 8(6):157-165. 
 
BC Cook Articulation Committee (2015). Food Safety, Sanitation, and Personal Hygiene. BC campus, Victoria.  
(Accessed on 3 October 2020). 
             
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) (2020). Making Water Safe in An Emergency.  (Accessed on 
3 October 2020). 
 
Cortese RDM, Veiros MB, Feldman C & Cavalli SB (2015). Food safety and hygiene practices of vendors during 
the chain of street food production in Florianopolis, Brazil: A cross-sectional study. Food Control 62:178-
186.  
 
Ejemot-Nwadiaro RI, Ehiri JE, Arikpo D, Meremikwu MM & Critchley JA (2015). Hand washing promotion for 
preventing diarrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 9. doi 
 
Kotloff KL (2017). The Burden and Etiology of Diarrheal Illness in Developing Countries. Pediat Clin N Am 64:799-
814. 
 
Linscott  AJ (2011). Food-borne illnesses. Clin Microbiol Newsl 33(6):41-45. 
 
MOH (1985). Malaysian Food Act 1983 and Food Regulation 1985. Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
 
MOH (1988). Prevention and Control of Communicable Disease Act 1988. Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala 
Lumpur. 
 
MOH (2009). Food Hygiene Regulations 2009. Food Safety and Quality Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia, 
Putrajaya. 
 
MOH (2017). MOH Annual Report 2017. Disease Control Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
 
Rajagopal L (2013). Educating immigrant Hispanic food service workers about food safety using visual-based 
training. J Ext 51(2). 
 
Salleh W, Lani MN, Wan Abdullah WZ, Tuan Chilek TZ & Hassan Z (2017). A review on incidences of food borne 
diseases and interventions for a better national food safety system in Malaysia. Malay Appl Biol 46(3):1-
7. 
 
Shaﬁza Ezat WP, Neety D & Sangaran G (2013). Paper Reviews of factors, surveillance and burden of food borne 
disease outbreak in Malaysia. MJPHM 13:98-105. 
 
Soon JM, Singh H & Baines R (2011). Foodborne disease in Malaysia. A review. Food Control 22:823-830. 
 
WHO (2004). International Statistical Classiﬁ cation of Diseases and Related Health Problems (IDC 10). 10
th 
revision. World Health Organization, Geneva. 
 
WHO (2006). Five Keys to Safer Food. Food Safety Manual. World Health Organization, Geneva. 
 
WHO (2008). Food and Agriculture Regional Asia Paci ﬁc. Preventing Food-borne Illness from Farm to Plate 
Highlights of Best Practice. World Health Organization, Geneva. 
 
WHO (2015). WHO Estimates the Global Burden of Food Borne Diseases. Food Borne Disease Burden 
Epidemiology Reference Group 2007-2015. World Health Organization, Geneva. 
 
WHO (2020). Food Safety. https://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/food-safety (Accessed on 3 
October 2020) 
 
218 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Appendices
219Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
220 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Appendices 
Figure 13.3: Five keys to safer food
221Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Figure 13.4: 7 steps of appropriate hand washing
Keep your 
hands clean
WASH YOUR 
HANDS PROPERLY
Lather hand 
with soap
Rub your palms Rub each finger and 
between fingers
Scrub nails on 
palms
Rub back of hands 
and between fingers
Wash hands with 
sufficient clean water
Dry hands with clean 
cloth or tissue
Practice washing 
hands:
 After using the toilet
 Before eating
 Before and while 
 preparing food
 When you touch raw 
 food materials, 
 contaminated surfaces; 
 your face, nose, 
 ears or other parts of 
 the body
 Whenever your hands 
 are dirty
Clean hands can prevent disease.
The choice is in your hands
Published by: Health Education Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia
www.infosihat.gov.my, www.myhealth.gov.my
BUT. 20,KKM (CETAK/PB) 236/2008,  BI 4, 000   
MINISTRY OF HEAL TH MALA YSIA
Steps
222 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
223Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
healthy food
KEY 
MESSAGE
14
Make effective use of nutrition 
information on food labels
14.1 Terminology 
Claim 
 
Claim means any representation which states, 
suggests or implies that a food has particular 
qualities relating to its origin,
 nutritional 
properties, nature, processing, composition or any 
other quality. 
 
Reduction of disease risk claim 
 
Reduction of disease risk claim relates the 
consumption of a food or food component to the 
reduced risk of developing a disease or health-
related condition. 
 
Food label 
 
A food label includes any tag,
 brand, mark, pictorial 
or other descriptive matter, written, printed, 
stenciled, marked, painted, embossed or impressed 
on, or attached to or included in, belonging to, or 
accompanying any food. 
 
 
 
 
Front-of-pack nutrition labelling (FOP-NL) 
 
Front-of-pack nutrition labelling (FOP-NL) is any 
system that presents simpliﬁ ed nutrition 
information on the front-of-pack of pre-packaged 
foods. It can include symbols/ graphics, text or a 
combination thereof
, that provide information on 
the overall nutritional value of the food and/ or on 
the nutrients (FAO/ WHO, 2019).  
 
Nutrient addition or fortiﬁcation claim 
 
A claim in which the food “contains” or “added”
 
(or words of similar meaning) or “enriched” or 
“fortiﬁed” (or words of similar meaning) with 
speciﬁc vitamins, minerals, amino acids, fatty 
acids, nucleotides or other food components. The 
food must meet speciﬁed conditions stipulated in 
the Food Regulation 1985 (MOH, 1985).      
 
Nutrient comparative claim 
 
A nutrient comparative claim is a claim that 
compares the nutrient levels and/ or energy values 
of two or more foods. 
 
224 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
1414
KEY MESSAGE
MAKE EFFECTIVE USE OF 
NUTRITION INFORMATION ON 
FOOD LABELS
Dr. Tee E Siong, Ms. Fatimah Sulong, Ms. Maizatul Azlina Chee Din and Mr. Leong Han Yin.
225Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Nutrient content claim 
 
A nutrient content claim describes the level of a 
nutrient in a food product. 
 
Nutrient function claim 
 
A nutrient function claim describes the 
physiological role of the nutrient in growth, 
development and normal functions of the body. 
 
Nutrition information panel 
 
The nutrition information panel or NIP is a table 
found in one section of a food label declaring the 
amount of nutrients contained in the food. 
Nutrition labelling 
 
A nutrition label is a listing of the level of 
nutrient(s) as displayed on the food label. It is 
meant to provide factual information about the 
nutritional content of the product. 
 
Other function claim 
 
A claim that describes speci
ﬁc beneﬁcial effect of 
other food component in the food that gives 
positive contribution to health or improvement of 
a function of the body. 
 
 
 
14.2 Introduction 
Consumers gather information about the foods they 
purchase from a wide variety of sources. Family members, 
relatives, friends, the media and advertising all convey 
messages about diff erent food characteristics. 
Information may also be found on the food product label. 
From a health standpoint, nutrition information on a food 
label is particularly important. Such information may 
assist consumers in making better food choices when 
planning their daily meals.  
 
Providing nutrition information on food labels has thus 
been recognised as one of the strategies adopted to assist 
consumers in adopting healthy dietary practices. It is 
however essential to ensure that the information provided 
are accurate and truthful (WHO, 2004). Recognising the 
need for more effective regulation of the nutrition labels 
and claims on food packages, the Ministry of Health 
(MOH) Malaysia gazetted amendments to Food 
Regulations 1985 in 2003 (MOH, 1985). Regulations were 
introduced to enable manufacturers to describe the 
nutritional qualities of a food product factually and 
informatively, thereby assisting the consumers in making 
informed choices of food when planning daily diets. These 
regulations, especially those pertaining to nutrition and 
health claims, have been updated periodically. To assist 
all stakeholders in understanding and using these 
regulations, a guide book was published by the MOH 
(MOH, 2010).  
In recent years, in addition to the regulations on 
mandated back or side NIP and nutrition and health 
claims, the MOH has introduced other forms of nutrition 
information guide. Through voluntary schemes, food 
manufacturers may also add summary nutrition 
information on the front-of-pack (FOP) to provide further 
guidance to consumers.  
 
These diff erent approaches to communicate nutrition 
information through food labels have become important 
part of the strategy to assist consumers in adopting 
healthy dietary practices. In addition, these approaches 
also aim to encourage food industries to be mindful of the 
importance of nutritional quality of their products and 
make available healthier food options to consumers. 
 
This key message aims to update the MDG 2010 (NCCFN, 
2010) and assist consumers in understanding and 
effectively utilising the nutrition information permitted 
under the Food Regulations, 1985 (MOH, 1985), namely 
(1) nutrition labelling, (2) nutrition and health claims, (3) 
authorised FOP-NL systems in Malaysia, (4) ingredient 
list (Figure 14.3). It is important to emphasise to 
consumers that such nutrition information should be used 
appropriately, in combination, to serve as effective guides 
in making healthier food choices.  
 
 

226 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
14.2.1 Understanding nutrition labelling 
 
Nutrition labelling or nutrient declaration describes the 
nutrient content of a food product. The nutrients are 
declared as a table in one section of a food label
, 
commonly known as a nutrition information panel or NIP 
(Table 14.1). Such information on nutritional quality, when 
factually and informatively provided, can assist the 
consumer in making better choices of food when 
planning their daily meals. Such information serves to 
remind the consumer to think of nutritional quality of a 
food in addition to other information such as storage 
conditions, instructions for use and expiry date. Nutrition 
labelling can be a useful educational tool (WHO, 2004; 
FAO/ WHO, 2017).  
 
 
14.2.1.1  Nutrition labelling is compulsory for a 
wide variety of foods  
 
Nutrition labelling has been made compulsory for 
selected foods in Malaysia since 2003. The regulations 
require the following foods to have compulsory nutrition 
labelling (MOH, 1985): 
 
• 153 types of food
, including: pasta, breakfast 
cereals, bread; milk and milk products; sweetening 
creamer; ﬂour confection; meat products and 
canned meat; ﬁ sh products and canned ﬁ sh; 
preserved egg; edible fats and oil; vegetable 
products and juices; soup and soup stock; fruit 
products and juices; jam, fruit jelly marmalade and 
seri kaya; nuts and nut products; premix coff ee; 
chocolate, milk chocolate, milk shake;  sauces, 
salad dressing, mayonnaise, chutney and pickle; 
soft drinks; and isotonic electrolyte drink.   
  
A complete list of the foods is given in the Table 14.3 
(MOH, 1985). 
 
• Foods making nutrition claims   
 
• Foods that “contain” or “added” (or words of 
similar meaning) or “enriched” or “fortiﬁ ed” (or 
words of similar meaning) with speciﬁc vitamins, 
minerals, amino acids, fatty acids, nucleotides or 
other food components (with permitted other 
function claims).   
 
• Special purpose foods: infant formula, follow-up 
formula, canned food for infants and young 
children and cereal-based food for infants and 
young children. 
The following are examples of some foods that are 
exempted from the nutrition labelling requirements: 
 
• Fresh fruits and vegetables 
 
• Raw meat and poultry (except when ground), raw 
ﬁsh and seafood 
 
• Foods prepared or processed at the store (bakery 
items, salads) 
 
• Foods that contain very few nutrients such as 
coffee, tea, herbs and spices 
 
• Alcoholic beverages 
 
 
14.2.1.2 The nutrients that must be declared 
and the format for declaration 
 
• Energy (calorie) (in kilocalories – kcal or kilojoules 
– kJ or both) 
 
• Protein  (in gram – g) 
 
• Carbohydrate (in gram – g)   
 
• Fat (in gram – g) 
 
• T
otal sugars (in gram – g) 
 
• Sodium (in milligram – mg) 
 
The regulations require the information of energy content 
and all the mandatory nutrients must be declared in each 
serving of a food. For product that contains more than 1 
serving of food, the nutrition information should be 
expressed per 100 g or per 100 ml as well. Also, the 
serving size should be stated on the label.   
 
The energy and nutrients mentioned above, commonly 
presented in a table, known as a Nutrition Information 
Panel (NIP). A sample NIP, declaring only the mandatory 
or core nutrients, is given in Table 14.1.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

227Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
14.2.1.3 Optional nutrients that may be declared  
Besides the mandatory nutrients, other nutrients that are 
present in the product may also be declared in NIP
. For 
instance, dietary ﬁ bre and cholesterol content may be 
declared even the product only contains a minimum 
amount of those nutrients. However, product may only 
declare vitamins and minerals if they are present in 
signiﬁcant amounts, which is at least 5% of the Nutrient 
Reference Value.  
 
 
The format for declaration of these optional nutrients is 
the same as that for the mandatory nutrients, i.e., in per 
100 g or per 100 ml and per serving. A sample NIP for the 
declaration of optional nutrients is given in Table 14.2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nutrition Information
Per 100 ml Per serving (200 ml)
Serving size : 200 ml 
Servings per package : 5
Energy (kcal) 100 200 
(kJ) 420 840 
Carbohydrate (g) 23.8 47.6 
Total sugars* (g) 11.5 23.0 
Protein (g) 1.1 2.2 
Fat (g) 0 0 
Sodium (mg) 0 0
*Total sugars refer to all monosaccharides and disaccharides contained in the food 
Source: MOH (1985)
Table 14.1:  An example of Nutrition Information Panel (NIP) with only mandatory nutrients 
228 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Table 14.2: An example of of Nutrition Information Panel (NIP) with optional nutrients 
Nutrition Information
Per 100 ml Per serving (200 ml)
Serving size : 200 ml 
Servings per package : 5
Energy (kcal) 100 200 
(kJ) 420 840 
Carbohydrate (g) 23.8 47.6 
Total sugars (g) 11.5 23.0 
Protein (g) 1.1 2.2 
Fat (g) 5.8 11.6 
Monounsaturated fatty acids (g) 2.1 4.2 
Polyunsaturated fatty acids (g) 1.0 2.0 
Saturated fatty acids (g) 2.4 4.8 
Trans fatty acids (g) 0.3 0.6 
Sodium (mg) 20 40 
Cholesterol (mg) 49 98 
Dietary fibre (g) 1.8 3.6 
Vitamin A (μg RE) 80 160 
Vitamin D (μg NE) 1.2 2.4 
Vitamin E (mg) 0.5 1.0 
Vitamin C (mg) 10.0 20.0 
Thiamin (mg) 0.1 0.2 
Riboflavin (mg) 0.6 1.2 
Niacin (mg) 1.0 2.0 
Vitamin B6 (mg) 0.1 0.2 
Folate (μg DFE) 22 44 
Vitamin B12 (μg) 0.4 0.8 
Calcium (mg) 270 540 
Magnesium (mg) 19 38 
Iron (mg) 1.5 3.0 
Zinc (mg) 2.3 4.6 
Iodine (μg) 8 16 
*Optional nutrients refer to those nutrients that are not classified as mandatory nutrients, namely energy, 
carbohydrate, total sugars, protein, fat and sodium. 
Source: MOH (1985) 
229Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
14.2.1.4 Use nutrition label wisely 
 
Nutrition labels can be a useful source for nutrition 
information. This information is commonly found in a 
table on the product label
, known as the Nutrition 
Information Panel (NIP) (Tee et al., 2018). Food regulations 
in Malaysia require that products must provide 
information on the amount of energy, carbohydrate, 
protein, fat, sodium and total sugars on the label. In 
certain products, consumer may also ﬁnd content of other 
nutrients such as vitamins, minerals, dietary ﬁ bre and 
cholesterol. The consumer can then consider how this 
food contributes to the total nutrient intake of the day. 
Figure 14.4 explains the diff erent components of the 
Nutrition Information Panel and can serve as a guide to its 
use.  
 
Nutrition labels will also enable a consumer to compare 
the nutrient composition of the different brands available 
for the same food item (Figure 14.5). He should be guided 
by the content of all the nutrients provided on the label, 
not merely the level of one nutrient, for example fat. He 
should choose a product that meets energy and nutrient 
requirements, whether he need more or less of certain 
nutrients. Nutrition labels can stimulate the consumer to 
be more nutrition conscious. He should think of 
“nutrition”, not just when he is purchasing processed 
foods, but also when he is making choices for fresh food, 
cooked meals, as well as when preparing his daily meals 
(Tee, 2006a).  
 
It should be borne in mind that nutrition labelling is only 
one of the educational tools in guiding food choices. Use 
this, in addition to other reliable sources of nutrition 
information, to strengthen nutrition knowledge about 
food and nutrition and their role in health and disease. 
 
 
14.2.2 Permitted nutrition claims  
 
Nutrition claims are permitted on food labels,  with the 
introduction of a nutrition claims regulations by the 
Ministry of Health in 2003 (MOH,
 1985).  
 
Five types of nutrition claims are permitted and these are 
along the line of the guidelines of the Codex Alimentarius, 
a set of international standards and guidelines established 
by a Joint Food Programme of the Food and Agriculture 
Organization  and World Health Organization  (FAO/ 
WHO, 2013). 
 
The ﬁve types of nutrition claims permitted in Malaysia 
are:   
 
a. Nutrient content claim   
b. Nutrient comparative claim   
c. Nutrient function claim    
d. Other function claim 
e. Nutrient addition or fortiﬁcation claim 
 
As the name suggests, nutrient content claim describes 
the level of a nutrient in a food product. A permitted 
nutrient content claim on the label of a beverage is, for 
example, “source of vitamin C” or “high in calcium”. 
Similarly, such claims can be made for protein, dietary 
ﬁber, alpha-linolenic acid, ganglioside and 13 vitamins as 
well as 11 minerals. These are the so-called “good 
nutrients” which are encouraged to be consumed as they 
are supposedly beneﬁ cial to health. In contrast to the 
above, another type of nutrient content claim is, for 
example, “low in cholesterol” or “fat free”. These claims 
are the so-called “bad nutrients”, namely, energy, fat, 
saturated fat, cholesterol, trans fatty acids, sugars and 
sodium which are discouraged to be consumed. There 
are, of course, no “bad nutrients”, with the exception of 
trans fatty acids. All nutrients, including energy, fat and 
cholesterol are all required for normal body functions. It is 
really the excessive intakes of these nutrients that are 
undesirable. Indeed, excessive intakes of vitamins and 
minerals too, are undesirable! The permitted nutrient 
content claims and the required conditions for making 
such claims are given in Table 14.4. 
 
A nutrient comparative claim is a claim that compares the 
nutrient levels and/ or energy values of two or more foods. 
One such claim is “less fat”, or “reduced sodium”. The 
opposing comparative claim is “extra vitamin A”, or 
“more protein”, and so on.    
 
The third type of nutrition claim is the nutrient function 
claim, which describes the physiological role of the 
nutrient in growth, development and normal functions of 
the body. An example of such claim is: calcium helps in 
the development of strong bones and teeth.    
 
Besides nutrients in the classical sense, the fourth type of 
claims are other function claims for several food 
components. Other function claim that describes speciﬁc 
beneﬁcial effect of other food component in the food that 
gives positive contribution to health or improvement of a 
function of the body. Examples are: plant sterol helps to 
lower blood cholesterol; oat soluble ﬁ bre (beta-glucan) 
helps to lower blood cholesterol.  
 
The Ministry of Health has published a total of 23 
permitted nutrient function claims for 15 vitamins and 
minerals (Table 14.5). These claims include those for 
nutrients and have been supported by scientiﬁc data for 
a long time, e.g., for iron, vitamins A, B and C. MOH has 
also provided another list of 43 permitted other function 
claims for 22 other food components, which have been 
approved based on more recent scientiﬁc ﬁndings (Table 
14.6) (MOH, 1985). These are mostly for non-nutrients, or 
the “other food components”. Only the claims on these 
two lists are permitted on food labels. If the food industry 
wishes to propose a new claim for a nutrient or other food 
component, an application has to be made to the Ministry 
of Health. In the process of permitting a new nutrition 
claim, MOH adheres to stringent rules that require the 
application to submit a dossier which includes scientiﬁc 
evidence to substantiate the intended claim (MOH, 2010). 
 
This food regulation has required the food must contain a 
speciﬁed minimum amount of the nutrient or other food 
component, where speciﬁ c criteria that must be met 
before the nutrient function claims and other function 
claims are permitted on a label.  
 
230 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
The ﬁfth type of claim is related to the addition or 
fortiﬁcation of nutrients and other food components to 
food. Claim for “contain”, or “added” (or words of similar 
meaning) or “enriched” or “fortiﬁed” (or words of similar 
meaning) with speciﬁ c vitamins, minerals, amino acids, 
fatty acids, nucleotides, or other food components (with 
permitted other function claims). To be able to make these 
claims, the food must meet speciﬁed minimum levels as 
stipulated by Food Regulations 1985 (Table 14.7). Some 
examples of nutrient addition claim are: “This beverage 
contains prebiotics” or “This milk powder has added 
DHA” while examples of nutrient enrichment or 
fortiﬁcation claims are: “This bread is enriched with 
vitamin B2”, or “This ﬂour is fortiﬁed with iron”.    
 
If a food label has any of the nutrition claims mentioned 
above, a further condition must be met: the amount of all 
the mandatory core nutrients (energy, protein, 
carbohydrate, total sugars, fat and sodium) as well as the 
nutrient or other food component that is being claimed 
are mandatory to be declared on the label.  
 
 
14.2.2.1 Reduction of disease risk claims are 
not permitted   
 
Claims linking the consumption of a food or food 
component to the reduced risk of developing a disease is 
not permitted. Hence ,
 a claim that “nutrient A helps 
reduce risk to coronary heart disease” is not permitted to 
be made on the food label.  
 
Consumers should realise that chronic diseases have 
multiple causes and taking a particular nutrient or food 
component alone will not reduce risk to any diseases, for 
instance: coronary heart diseases, diabetes or cancers. In 
addition to taking that nutrient or food, one must practice 
overall healthy eating and adopt a healthy lifestyle. The 
consumers should not be misled by a health claim and 
consume excessive amounts of this food and omit other 
items from his diet.    
 
 
14.2.2.2 Appropriate and effective use of 
nutrition claims 
 
Nutrition claims provide further information to the 
consumer,
 in addition to the declaration of amounts of 
nutrients on the label. For consumers, the nutrition claim 
on the label becomes a value-added point of product 
differentiation. Provided that they are scientiﬁ cally 
substantiated, nutrition claims related to food products 
can facilitate consumers to make well-informed food 
choices. Nutrient content claim describes the level of 
nutrient in a food product, for example, “high in” or 
“source of” certain nutrients (e.g., protein, ﬁbre, vitamins, 
minerals), or “low in” or “free of” certain nutrients (e.g., 
sugar, sodium, fat). Nutrient comparative claim compares 
the nutrient levels between two or more similar foods, for 
example “more”, “extra” or “lower” or “less”. Both of 
these claims provide descriptions of what those amounts 
of nutrients are. 
 
Some consumers incorrectly view that a food with 
nutrition claim is a healthier option compared to another 
similar product without such claims. Indeed, it should be 
pointed out to the consumers that it does necessarily 
mean that a product carrying a nutrition claim on the 
label is automatically a better choice. Over emphasis on a 
nutrition claim on a label could hinder the consumer from 
seeking additional information (NIP, ingredient list etc.) 
on the label and could lead to a wrong food choice. 
Consumers should be advised that such descriptors 
should be viewed in the right context and used 
appropriately (WHO, 2004; Tee, 2006b). 
 
Amongst the same category or type of food, a consumer 
may use such claims to guide in the selection of a 
particular brand. For example, amongst several similar 
beverages, the consumer may give preference to the one 
with “high vitamin C” claim. Amongst various brands of 
curry chicken, he may prefer the one with “low sodium” 
claim.  
 
A consumer, however, should not select a food merely 
based on one such claim. The beverage with the “high 
vitamin C” claim may have a high sugar content. 
Similarly, the chicken curry with the “low sodium” claim 
may have more fat compared to another brand. It does 
not mean that a food that does not have a “low in fat” 
claim is bad for the consumer. Similarly, it does not mean 
that a food with a “cholesterol free” claim is the best 
choice. It should be emphasised that the consumer must 
look for the overall nutritional proﬁle as provided by the 
NIP of the food and not just rely on one or two claims on 
the label (Tee et al, 2019).  
 
Nutrient function claim and other function claim provide 
information to the consumers regarding the physiological 
role and speciﬁ c beneﬁ cial eff ect of that particular 
nutrient or food component that gives positive 
contribution to the functioning of the body. These types 
of claims can potentially provide useful information to a 
consumer, when used together with other nutrition 
information from various sources. It should be 
emphasised to the consumer that this claim should not 
imply that the nutrient cures, treats or protects a person 
from diseases (Tee, 2006b). 
231Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
14.2.3 F ront-of-Pack Nutrition Labelling (FOP-
NL) as additional guides in making 
food choice 
 
Front-of-pack nutrition labelling (FOP-NL) is any system 
that presents simpliﬁed nutrition information on the front-
of-pack of pre-packaged foods. It can include symbols/ 
graphics, text or a combination thereof
, that provide 
information on the overall nutritional value of the food 
and/ or on the nutrients contained in the product (FAO/ 
WHO, 2019). Two FOP-NL systems, namely energy icon 
and Healthier Choices Logo (HCL) were introduced in 
Malaysia in 2012 and 2017, respectively. 
 
 
 
 
14.2.3.1 Energy icon 
 
Energy Icon or the Front of Pack Labelling for Energy is a 
tool that was introduced by the Ministry of Health 
Malaysia in 2012. This informative system aims at 
providing instant information on the amount of calorie/ 
energy content (in one serving) of a particular product at 
the front panel of a package
. The icon also shows the 
percentage of calorie/ energy contributed by one serving 
of that product, expressed as percentage of 2000 kcal, 
which is the average daily energy requirement of a normal 
weight adult. During grocery shopping, consumers might 
use the Energy Icon as a quick guide of a packaged food’s 
calorie/ energy content. Figure 14.1 shows how the 
calorie/ energy contained in a serving of a food and 
percent contribution to daily energy 
requirement can be 
quickly interpreted.  
One serving 
(200 ml) contains
Amount of energy (kcal) in one serving of 
the product, which is 130 kcal in 200 ml 
(1 serving)
Energy contributed by one serving of the 
product, expressed as % of average 
daily adult energy requirement (2000 
kcal), which is 7% out of 2000 kcal
Based on 
2000 kcal
7%
Energy 
130 kcal
Figure 14.1: An example of NIP of Energy Icon 
Source: Tee et al. (2019) 
232 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
The nutrition information that can be obtained and 
interpreted from the Energy Icon helps the consumers to 
monitor their total calorie intake according to their actual 
requirement. It helps to ensure that the total calorie intake 
do not exceed the recommended daily calorie intake, 
thereby helping consumers to avoid over-consumption. 
In addition, consumers who are concerned about 
excessive energy intake can use the Energy Icon to 
compare the calorie contents of two or more products 
within the same category and hence make smarter choice 
(Tee et al., 2018). 
 
It should be noted that not all the packaged foods on the 
market will have the Energy Icon on their label. This is 
because the FOP-NL is a voluntary programme agreed 
upon by the food and beverage industries and not 
mandated by law.  
 
 
 
 
14.2.3.2 Healthier Choice Logo (HCL)  
 
The Healthier Choices Logo (HCL) is an initiative 
introduced by the Ministry of Health in April 2017. HCL is 
a criteria-based front-of-pack scheme that is intended to 
provide point-of-sale information to the consumers in 
making informed food choices by merely looking at the 
front panel of the food packages. Packaged foods and 
beverages can be awarded the HCL Logo if they meet the 
nutrient criteria speci
ﬁed by the Ministry of Health 
Malaysia. Consumers can easily identify the healthier 
products within the same category if the products carry 
the HCL Logo as per shown in Figure 14.2. A speciﬁc HCL 
statement is required to be displayed below the HCL 
Logo to further indicate that the comparison is only 
within the same product category. Consumers should be 
reminded not to choose products solely based on the HCL 
Logo. They should be advised to refer to other available  
information (NIP, nutrition and health claims, ingredient 
list etc.) as well to understand the nutritional quality of a 
product (Tee et al, 2019). 
Figure 14.2: Prescribed HCL Logo 
Source: MOH (2020) 
HEALTHIER
CHOICE
PILIHAN LEBIH SIHAT
KEM
ENTERIAN KESIHATAN MALAYSIA
Perbandingan produk dalam kategori *bijirin sarapan sahaja 
Compared within *breakfast cereal category only
Note:
*Except for drinking water / mineral water and fresh milk, products are required to include 
this statement below the logo to indicate that the comparison is only within the same 
product category.
233Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
A standard set of nutrient proﬁle, termed as HCL nutrient 
criteria has been established to determine the healthier 
product within the same category in the HCL programme. 
In 2017, an HCL Expert Committee that comprises policy 
makers, experts and academicians from the ﬁ elds of 
nutrition, food technology and food science was formed to 
revise and develop the HCL nutrient criteria. Diff erent 
nutrient criteria have been established for each food 
category and is used to determine the healthier products 
within the same product category. Only products that 
comply with the prescribed HCL nutrient criteria will be 
deemed as healthier within that category and will be 
approved to carry the HCL logo. These standardised 
nutrient proﬁles for the different food categories provides 
guidance to the food and beverage industries and 
stimulate product innovation and reformulation towards 
healthier options. The MOH has also informed 
stakeholders that the criteria will be reviewed and 
tightened from time to time to reﬂ ect either the latest 
scientiﬁc updates or the prevailing food and nutrition 
situation in the country. This stepwise nutrient criteria 
revision provides impetus to the industries to 
continuously improve their products. In addition, this 
gradual approach helps facilitates the consumers to 
gradually accustom their taste and preference towards 
products with lower calories, sugar, fat and sodium 
content (CIF, 2019). Ultimately, the desired outcome of 
this FOP-NL is to create an environment that supports 
healthy eating and hence combating the increasing trend 
of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) and the 
prevalence of obesity in Malaysia (MOH, 2020). 
 
The implementation of HCL is also on a voluntary basis. 
Food and beverage companies may apply to Ministry of 
Health for the use of this logo. Only products which are in 
full compliance with the Food Regulation 1985 as well as 
Guidelines on Healthier Choice Logo Malaysia may be 
approved to carry the logo on the product label for a 
duration of 2 years. Further details on the HCL may be 
obtained from the Guidelines on Healthier Choice Logo 
Malaysia (MOH, 2020). 
 
 
14.2.4 Ingredients list 
 
The ingredients that are used to formulate a product will 
determine its nutritional value . 
All prepackaged food 
products must contain an ingredient list. Hence, this 
ingredient list can be useful in guiding consumers in 
choosing products appropriate to his needs. The 
ingredients are listed in order of weight, from the most to 
the least. For example, if the ﬁ rst few ingredients are 
whole grains such as whole grain wheat, oat, or barley, 
the food contains a high proportion of whole grain. If 
sugar or similar terms such as sucrose, glucose, fructose, 
corn syrup is listed as the ﬁrst few ingredients, the food is 
high in sugar (Tee et al., 2019). It should be noted that an 
ingredient maybe listed in di fferent terms. For example, 
sugar may be listed as sucrose, glucose, fructose or corn 
syrup. 
 
 
 
 
14.2.5 Educate from an early age 
 
Children begin to have a further interaction with the 
environment when they start going to school.  During this 
time
, they begin to take care of themselves more, and 
need to make many choices. These include making food 
choices. It is vital for the children to establish good habits, 
and this should include choosing proper and healthy 
foods on their own. Therefore, it is important to inculcate 
the habit of reading food labels among our children to 
inﬂuence their eating habits from the early ages. Such 
knowledge and experience gained will have a 
tremendous long-term impact and assist them in making 
healthy food choices for life. In this regard, parents and 
teachers can play key roles.  
 
Educating children to understand nutrition information 
on food label can be anywhere, whether in supermarkets, 
at home or as part of the school syllabus. There are many 
opportunities to create an enjoyable environment to 
decode new experience on food labels and make healthier 
choices. Never underestimate the potential beneﬁ ts of 
informal education opportunities. Children who tag along 
with parents when shopping in supermarkets could be 
educated on nutrition labelling. These are excellent 
opportunities to discuss with children about making 
healthy food choices, how to use the nutrition information 
on the label and the signiﬁcance of the nutrients and the 
values declared. It can be in the form of games too, like 
hunting to ﬁnd nutritious options – example: wholegrain 
cereal that is low in sugar and sodium, but high in 
calcium and ﬁbre. Educating the basics nutrition principle 
and nutrition label to children can also be done easily at 
home. The foods they like to eat can be used as an 
example with the nutritional information on hand. While 
snacking, point to them to look at the nutrition 
information panel and serving size to discover what they 
are eating. 
 
Helping children to understand nutrition information on 
food label is a lot easier if parents and teachers 
themselves understand the content of those labels. They 
can start by focusing on a few simple items on the food 
label. For example, start with the basics by showing the 
healthier choice logo or ingredient listing on the food 
label. Once the children have mastered that, move to the 
next phase to the more complex parts of the label, for 
example the nutrition information panel (NIP). Even 
within the NIP, break up into several sessions and start 
with understanding basic information such as serving 
size. Understanding the calorie content of foods is useful. 
However, depending on the age of the children, it may not 
be useful to explain the content of all the vitamins and 
minerals declared on the NIP.  
 
Children must be familiarised with nutrition even in their 
early years and let nutrition principles guide them to a 
healthier future (Tee, 2006a). By educating children to 
understand nutrition information on food labels early, we 
are preparing them with an important skill for making 
healthier food choices, which will help shaping their 
eating habits for life. 
 
 
234 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
14.3 Current status 
Since the gazetting of the nutrition labelling and claims 
regulations in 2003 in Malaysia, several small scale 
studies, amongst various consumer groups in diff erent 
parts of the country have been conducted since 2010 to 
determine the extent consumers are reading nutrition 
labels and claims, their understanding and utilisation of 
these information.   
 
Zul Ariff  & Mohamad Armizi (2015) reported that 
consumers believed that those food products with 
nutrition label might indicate that they are quality 
products. Their purchasing behaviour were based on the 
availability of nutrition declaration on food labels. There 
were reported mixed ﬁ ndings between gender and 
attitude towards the use of nutrition label (Nurliyana et 
al., 2011; Norazlanshah et al., 2013; Hayati Adlin et al., 
2015; Anne Tan et al., 2020). The investigators also 
reported that even though consumers have better 
knowledge about nutrition labelling, this ﬁnding had no 
effect on the use of nutrition label (Nurliyana et al., 2011; 
Norazlanshah et al., 2013; Norsakira  et al., 2019; Anne Tan 
et al., 2020).  
 
Several factors were determined to be associated with the 
reasons why consumers did not read nutrition label such 
as difficulty in understanding, confusion, time constraints, 
small font size, lack of interest, purchasing the same 
products regularly and no health concern (Norazmir et al., 
2012; Nurliyana et al., 2011; Norsakira et al., 2019; Anne 
Tan et al., 2020). Fatimah et al. (2010) also reported that 
despite a “perfect” NIP format preferred, it was not 
necessarily resulted the ability to extract information from 
the NIP. A few studies also highlighted the importance to 
strengthen the strategy on nutrition labelling education 
and advocacy programmes (Fatimah et al., 2010; Hayati 
Adlin et al., 2015). 
 
The largest data set available on the use and 
understanding of nutrition labelling are ﬁndings from the 
Third National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS III) 
carried out in 2006 (IPH, 2008). This nationwide survey 
included a section on determining the practices of 
seeking information on food and nutrition labels among 
the community. The total number of respondents in this 
survey who responded to questions on food/ nutrition 
labelling was 39,506. The study reported that 78.2% of the 
responses read the nutrition label when buying or 
receiving food. The most popular information in food label 
that the respondents read was the expiry date (71.2%). 
Less than 15% of the responses were looking for 
nutritional information such as energy (4.7%), fat (9.7%), 
carbohydrate (7.5%), vitamin (8.2%), salt (5.3%), mineral 
contents (4.3%), food additives (6.2%) and others (6.2%). 
Only 27 respondents (< 1%) actually took note of all the six 
elements of nutritional labelling (total energy, 
carbohydrate content and sugar, fat, salt/ sodium, vitamin, 
mineral). The study did not include aspects related to 
nutrition and health claims.  
 
When the same study was repeated under Malaysian 
Adult Nutrition Surveys (MANS) in 2014, involving 2992 
subjects nationwide, the prevalence of reading nutrition 
information from food label was 45.0% (IPH, 2014). Among 
those who read nutrition label, the nutritional information 
they were looking for were energy (14.5%), fat (19.9%), 
carbohydrate (including sugar) (21.6%), vitamin (9.1%), 
salt (6.7%), mineral contents (5.6%), food additives (6.2%) 
and ﬁbre (3.3%). Expiry date remained the most popular 
information been read compare to nutritional information 
(82.2%).  
 
There has been no published national study focusing on 
the FOP-NL in Malaysia.The ﬁrst study to determine the 
awareness and understanding of the FOP energy icon on 
food labels was done in Negeri Sembilan, Malaysia 
(Fatimah, Ruhaya & Zainudin, 2019a). The study showed 
that a high percentage (84.7%) (n = 310) were aware of 
the energy icon on food label. Among these respondents, 
more than half or 66.1% (n = 242) reported that it was easy 
to recognise the energy icon, while18.9% (n = 69) 
responded that it was hard to ﬁnd the icon and 15.0% (n 
= 55) were not sure of the icon. The study also showed 
that almost half (47.6%) (n = 174) of the respondents can 
extract the information from the energy icon “excellently” 
(scored 10 and 9 marks) when were requested to do so.  
 
Fatimah, Ruhaya & Zainudin, (2019b) also reported that 
80% of the respondents in Negeri Sembilan (n = 294) 
supported the implementation of HCL in Malaysia. 
Majority of them (81%, n = 297) believed that the use of 
the HCL is foreseen to increase one’s conﬁ dence in 
choosing food products. About 60% (n = 220) of the 
respondents would still choose to buy the products that 
bears the HCL even though the price may be slightly 
higher. The study also reported that a combination of 
three labelling systems, namely Nutrition Information 
Panel (NIP), Healthier Choice Logo (HCL) and Energy Icon 
was most preferred by the respondents (57.9%, n = 212). 
235Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
14.4 Key Recommendations 
 
Key Recommendation 1 
 
Be aware of the importance of reading food labels. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. Make reading labels as a habit while doing grocery shopping
. 
 
2. Identify the nutrition information on food labels. 
 
3. Be familiar with all the available nutrition information on food labels to have a better understanding of 
the nutritional value of a product. 
 
 
Key Recommendation 2 
 
Use Nutrition Information Panel (NIP) to guide in making healthier food product choices. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. Be familiar with information on the amount of energy and nutrients in prepackaged foods. 
 
2.
Consider how the energy and nutrients contained in a food contribute to the total intake of the day by 
referring to the “per serving” column in NIP. 
 
3. Compare the content of all the nutrients on the label of the different brands available for the same food 
item by referring to the “per 100 g or per 100 ml” column in NIP. 
 
 
Key Recommendation 3 
 
Make use of nutrition claims wisely. 
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. Look out for the following key words in relation to nutrient content claim and comparative claim: 
 
• Nutrient Content Claim 
 
- “low 
in”, “free of”, “zero”, “no” or words of similar meaning for product that contains 
certain nutrients that are to be reduced in intake (e.g., sugar, sodium and cholesterol). 
 
- “source of”, “high in”, “rich in” or words of similar meaning for product that contains 
certain nutrients that are encouraged to be consumed (e.g., calcium, dietary ﬁbre and 
protein).  
 
• Nutrient Comparative Claim 
 
- “reduced”, “less than”, “light”, “fewer” or  words of similar meaning for product 
that has a new formulation with lower or reduced amount of certain nutrients. 
 
- “increased”, “more”, “extra” or words of similar meaning for product that has a new 
formulation with increased or extra amount of certain nutrients. 
 
236 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
2. Be mindful that nutrient function claims and other function claims do not imply that the nutrient cures, 
treats or protects a person from diseases. 
 
3. Be aware that disease risk reduction claims that suggest that a food or food component can reduce the 
risk of a disease are not permitted. 
 
4. Make use of nutrition claims together with other nutrition information from various sources in making 
food choices. 
 
 
Key Recommendation 4 
 
Use Front-Of-Pack Nutrition Labelling (FOP-NL) as additional guide to make informed choices.  
 
How to Achieve 
 
1. Use Energy Icon to know the energy content of a packaged food.
 
 
2. Use Energy Icon to know how many percent of energy one serving of the product contributes to the 
amount needed daily. 
 
3. Use Healthier Choice Logo (HCL) to identify the healthier products within the same food category. 
 
4. Make use of FOP-NL in conjunction with other nutrition information on the food labels (NIP, nutrition 
claims and ingredient listing) to make food choices. 
 
 
Key Recommendation 5 
 
Use ingredient list on food label to understand the content of a food product. 
 
How to Achieve 
  
1.
Look at the ingredient list, which lists ingredients in descending order by weight; the ﬁrst few ingredients 
listed are the main ingredients of that particular product. 
 
2. Look for products with sugars and salt towards the end of the list if you are looking for products that are 
lower in sugars or salt.  
 
3. Note that an ingredient maybe listed in di fferent terms. For example, sugar may be listed as sucrose, 
glucose, fructose or corn syrup.  
 
 
Key Recommendation 6 
 
Educate children on the use of all the nutrition information on food label. 
 
How to 
Achieve 
 
1. F
amiliarise children with nutrition information even in their early years and let nutrition principles guide 
them in making healthier food choices throughout life. 
 
2. Create opportunities to educate children about nutrition information on food label. 
 
3. Explain to them the nutrition information and the signiﬁcance of each component on the label.  
 
237Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
14.5 References 
 
Anne Tan L, Phedra Hee JH, Tan MY, Aishath Suma SL & Sumita S (2020). Nutrition labelling use and its 
associated factors among medical students: A cross-sectional study. Int J Biomed Clinical Sci 5(3):153-
164. 
 
CIF (2019). International Choices Criteria – A Global Standard for Healthier Food (Version 2019). Choices 
International Foundation. 
 
FAO/WHO (2013). Codex Alimentarius Guidelines on Nutrition and Health Claims – CAC/GL 23-1997 (latest 
amendment in 2013). http://www.fao.org/fao-who-codexalimentarius/sh-
proxy/en/?lnk=1&url=https%253A%252F%252Fworkspace.fao.org%252Fsites%252Fcodex%252FStandar
ds%252FCXG%2B23-1997%252FCXG_023e.pdf 
 
FAO/ WHO (2017). Codex Alimentarius Guidelines on Nutrition Labelling – CAC/GL 2-1985 (latest amendment 
in 2017). Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, Rome. http://www.fao.org/fao-
whocodexalimentarius/shproxy/en/?lnk=1&url=https%253A%252F%252Fworkspace.fao.org%252Fsites
%252Fcodex%252FStandards%252FCXG%2B2-1985%252FCXG_002e.pdf 
 
FAO/ WHO (2019). Proposed Draft Guidelines on Front-of-Pack Nutrition Labelling – CX/FL 19/45/6. Codex 
Committee on Food Labelling. Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, Rome. 
 
Fatimah S, Nik Ismail ND & Tee ES (2010). Consumer understanding and preferences for diff erent nutrition 
information panel formats. Mal J Nutr 16(2):243-250. 
 
Fatimah S, Ruhaya S & Zainudin MA (2019a). Consumer awareness and understanding of front-of-pack (FOP) 
energy icon labelling in Negeri Sembilan, Malaysia. Mal J Nutr 25(2):287-296. 
 
Fatimah S, Ruhaya S, Zainudin MA (2019b). Consumer attitude regarding food labelling and perception of 
Healthier Choice Logo (HCL). Biomed J Sci & Tech Res 17(1):12459-12464. 
 
Hayati Adilin MAM, Siti Nor Fadillah AS, Mohd Aliff  AM, Nur Fattin Fatniah CA & Nur Syazwani O (2015). 
Nutritional labelling: awareness and its effects towards consumer behaviour in purchasing product. J 
Appl Environ Biol Sci 5(6S):62-68. 
 
IPH (2008). The Third National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS III) 2006. Vol. 2. Institute for Public Health, 
Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur.  
 
IPH (2014). National Health and Morbidity Survey 2014: Malaysian Adult Nutrition Survey (MANS) Vol. II: Survey 
Findings. Institute for Public Health, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 
 
MOH (1985). Food Regulations 1985. Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
 
MOH (2010). Guide to Nutrition Labelling and Claims (as at December 2010). Food Safety and Quality Division, 
Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya. 
 
MOH (2019). Infographic Kit Healthier Choice Logo Malaysia. Nutrition Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia, 
Putrajaya. 
 
MOH (2020). Guidelines on Healthier Choice Logo Malaysia. Nutrition Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia, 
Putrajaya. 
 
NCCFN (2010). Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2010. National Coordinating Committee on Food and Nutrition, 
Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya.  
 
Norazlanshah H, Muhammad I, Hasmira MD, Mashita M, Norfazilah MR & Fazlyla Nadya MF (2013). The use of 
nutrition label on food purchasing decision among university students in Kuantan, Malaysia. Health 
Environ J 4(1):1-10. 
 
Norazmir MN, Norazlanshah H , Nuri Naqieyah & Khairil Anuar MI (2012). Understanding and use of food 
package nutrition label among educated young adults. Pakistan J Nutr 11 (10): 836-842. 
 
238 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Norsakira J, Norazmir MN & Ruzita AT (2019). Nutrition labelling: an exploratory study on personal factors that 
inﬂuence the practice of reading nutrition labels among adolescents. Mal J Nutr 25(1):143-153. 
 
Nurliyana G, Norazmir MN & Khairil Anuar MI (2011). Knowledge, attitude and practices of university students 
regarding the use of nutritional information and food labels. Asian J Clin Nutr 3(3):79-91. 
 
Tee ES (2006a). Making Effective Use of Nutrition Labelling. NutriScene, The Star (Dec 3, 2006).  
 
Tee ES (2006b). Nutrition and Health Claims. NutriScene, The Star (Dec 17, 2006). 
 
Tee ES, Zaitun Y, Appukutty M, Tan YH, Ridzoni S, Norimah AK & Lee CL (2008). Eat Right, Enjoy Life. A Guide 
and Recipe Book published by Nutrition Month Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. Pp. 17. 
 
Tee ES, Zaitun Y, Yap RWK, Ng KF, Lee ZY, Chin YS & Zawiah H (2018). Your Only Choice: Eat Healthy Be Active. 
An Infographic Kit Vol. 3 published by Nutrition Month Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. Pp. 12. 
 
Tee ES, Zaitun Y, Yap RWK, Ng KF, Lee ZY, Chin YS & Zawiah H (2019). HE-AL Guide to Healthy Eating & Active 
Living Vol. 1. A Guide Book published by Nutrition Month Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. Pp. 21. 
 
WHO (2004). Global Strategy on Diet, Physical Activity and Health. World Health Organisation, Geneva.  
 
Zul Ariff AL & Mohamad Amizi A (2015). Food nutrition impact toward rural consumer in Kelantan. Aust J 
Basic Appl Sci 9(24):40-43. 
Appendices
239Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
240 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Appendices 
Perbandingan produk dalam 
kategori susu berperisa sahaja
Setiap hidangan
(200ml) mengandungi
tenaga
96kcal
5%
Berdasarkan
2000 kcal
Dihomogenkan 
dan 
Dipasteurkan
k
a
k
k
 n 
k
a
k
k
 n
Inilah yang kita perlukan
untuk membantu
pertumbuhan tulang dan 
gigi yang kuat.
Bahan Ramuan:
Pepejal Susu, Serbuk Koko,
Gula, Mineral (Kalsium), Bahan Perisa,
Penstabil (INS407), Bahan Pewarna (INS150C),
Bahan Pemanis (INS 995)
P E N U H D E N G A N
V
IT
A
M
IN
P
E
N
U
H
D
EN G A N V I T A M I N
SUSU
BERPERISA
COKLAT
Setiap
100ml
Setiap Hidangan
(200ml)
MAKLUMAT PEMAKANAN
Tenaga
Karbohidrat
Jumlah gula
Protein
Lemak
Vitamin D
Size hidangan : 200ml
Jumlah hidangan : 5
gg
Laktosa
Vitamin B6
Vitamin B12
Kalsium
96
8.4
13.6
11.6
5.2
4.6
2.0
1.0
0.8
260
48
4.2
6.8
5.8
2.6
2.3
1.0
0.5
0.4
130
kcal
g
g
g
g
mg
mg
kcal
g
g
g
g
mg
mg
KALSIUM
PROTEIN
Ia membantu dalam 
membina dan membaiki
tisu-tisu badan anda.
Nutrition 
Information Panel 
(NIP)
1
Nutrition 
Claims
2
Energy 
Icon
3a Healthier 
Choice Logo 
(HCL)
3b
Front-of-Pack Nutrition 
Labelling (FOP-NL)
3
Ingredient 
List
4
3b
2
3a
4
1
Source: MOH (2019) 
Figure 14.3: Nutrition information on food label
241Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Table 14.3: Foods requiring mandatory nutrition labeling
Regulation No Food category Types of food 
(as extracted from Food Regulations 1985)
63-75 Prepared cereal food Pasta, prepared cereal food (including breakfast 
and bread cereals), bread (white bread, fruit bread, milk bread, 
meal bread, rye bread, wheat-germ bread, wholemeal 
bread, enriched bread). 
 
84-87, 89-113, Milk & milk products Skimmed milk or skim milk or non-fat milk or separated 
116 milk, pasteurized milk, sterilised milk, ultra-high temperature 
milk or U.H.T. milk, flavoured milk, full cream milk powder or 
dried full cream milk, skimmed milk powder or skim milk 
powder or dried non-fat milk solids or separated milk powder, 
malted milk powder, recombined milk, reconstituted milk, 
evaporated milk or unsweetened condensed milk, condensed 
milk, sweetened condensed milk, lactose hydrolysed milk, 
filled milk, filled milk powder, evaporated filled milk/ 
unsweetened condensed filled milk, condensed filled milk/ 
sweetened condensed filled milk, cream/ raw cream, 
pasteurized cream, reduced cream/ pouring cream, butter, 
recombined butter, ghee, cheese, cottage cheese, cream 
cheese, processed cheese, cheese paste, cheese spread/ 
cheese mixture, club cheese/ luncheon cheese, dried cheese/ 
powdered cheese, cultured milk/ fermented milk, ice cream.  
 
134B Sweetening substance Sweetened creamer. 
 
135 Flour confection Any pastry, cake, biscuit/ other product prepared from 
mixture of flour/ meal and other food. 
 
146-152 Meat products and Meat paste, manufactured meat, smoked meat, 
canned meat canned meat, canned meat with other food, meat extract/ 
meat essence.  
 
157-170 Fish products and Fish product, cured, pickled/ salted fish, smoked fish, 
canned fish prepared fish, canned fish, fish paste, belacan, fish sauce, 
cincalok, oyster sauce, oyster flavoured sauce, fish ball or fish 
cake, fish keropok, otak udang, petis/ heko, pekasam.  
 
177 Egg product Preserved egg  
 
185-207 Edible fats and edible Margarine, fat spread, vanaspati, general standard for 
oil edible oil, cooking oil, refined coconut oil, unrefined coconut 
oil, corn oil, cottonseed oil, groundnut oil, peanut oil/ arachis 
oil, mustard seed oil, refined, bleached, deodorized palm oil, 
neutralised, bleached, deodorized palm oil, refined, bleached, 
deodorized palm olein, neutralised, bleached, deodorized 
palm olein, refined, bleached, deodorized palm kernel oil, olive oil, 
rice bran oil, rapeseed oil or toria oil, safflower seed oil, 
sesame seed oil/ gingelly oil, soya bean oil, sunflower seed oil. 
 
214-221 Vegetable products Salted vegetable, dried salted vegetable, tomato paste, 
and juices tomato pulp, tomato puree, vegetable juice, canned 
vegetable, fermented soya bean product.  
 
223-224 Soup and soup stock Soup, soup stock . 
242 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Source:  MOH (1985)
Table 14.3: Foods requiring mandatory nutrition labeling (cont...)
Regulation No Food category Types of food 
(as extracted from Food Regulations 1985)
226-242 Fruit products and Dried fruit, mixed dried fruit, fruit product, candied fruit or 
juices glaced fruit/ crystallised fruit, salted fruit, dried salted fruit, 
candied peel, canned fruit, canned fruit cocktail, fruit 
juice,apple juice, grapefruit juice, lemon juice, lime juice, 
orange juice, passion fruit juice, pineapple juice.  
 
246-249 Jam, fruit jelly, Jam, fruit jelly, marmalade, seri kaya.  
marmalade and seri  
kaya  
 
252-259 Nuts and nut products Nut, coconut milk, coconut cream, coconut cream 
concentrate, coconut cream powder, dessicated coconut, 
coconut paste, peanut butter.  
 
269A Tea, coffee, chicory Premix coffee. 
and related products  
 
279-281 Cocoa products Chocolate, white chocolate, milk chocolate.  
 
282 Milk shake Milk shake. 
 
339-347 Sauce, chutney and Sauce, soya sauce/ soya bean sauce/ kicap, hydrolysed 
pickle vegetable protein sauce/ hydrolysed plant protein sauce, 
blended hydrolysed vegetable protein sauce/ blended 
hydrolysed plant protein sauce, chilli sauce, tomato 
sauce/ tomato ketchup/ tomato catsup, salad dressing, 
mayonnaise, chutney, pickle.  
 
348-358 Soft drinks Syrup, fruit syrup/ fruit cordial/ fruit squash, flavoured syrup/ 
flavoured cordial, fruit juice drink, fruit drink, flavoured drink, 
soft drink base/ soft drink premix, botanical beverage mix, 
soya bean milk, soya bean drink.  
 
360D–360E Packaged drinking Isotonic electrolyte drink, isotonic electrolyte drink base. 
water  
 
26 (7) Foods that “contain” or “added” (or words of similar meaning) or “enriched” or “fortified” 
(or words of similar meaning) with specific vitamins, minerals, amino acids, fatty acids, 
nucleotides or other food components (with permitted other function claims).  
 
18B (14) Foods that make any nutrition claim on a label of a food product pertaining to its 
nutritional quality.  
 
388-391 Special purpose foods: infant formula, follow-up formula, canned food for infants 
and young children and cereal-based food for infants and young children.  
243Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
The NIP lists the amount of energy and several nutrients contained in the food. Example below explains 
the different components of the NIP.  
Nutrition Information
Nutrients Per 100 g Per serving (20 g)
Nutrient Listing The Amount of Nutrients Amounts of Nutrients per Serving
Serving size : 5 pieces (20 g)   
Servings per package : 5
Energy (kcal) 525 105 
Carbohydrate (g) 56.2 11.2 
     Total sugars (g) 12.5 2.5 
Protein (g) 8.0 1.8 
Fat (g) 29.8 6.0 
Sodium (mg) 25.0 5.0 
It is compulsory for many pre-
packaged foods to list the 
energy, carbohydrate, total 
sugars, protein fat and sodium 
content. 
The amount of vitamins and 
minerals may also be listed. 
This column refers to nutrients 
contained in every 100 g (if 
solid) or every 100 ml (if liquid) 
of a food or drink.  
In the example given, every 
100 g of the food provides 525 
kcal of energy, 56.2 g of 
carbohydrate, 12.5 g of total 
sugars, 8.0 g of protein, 29.8 g 
of fat and 25.0 mg of sodium.
This is the amount of nutrients 
and energy you receive in each 
serving of the food. 
 
In the example given, each 
serving of food (20 g) gives you 
105 kcal of energy.  
 
If you consume 2 servings of 
the food, the energy and 
nutrients consumed will be 
doubled.
Source: Tee et al. (2008)  
Figure 14.4: Components of Nutrition Information Panel (NIP)
244 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
The NIP on food label enables the comparison of the nutritional content among different brands of similar 
food and find out which ones are higher or lower in certain nutrients, thereby guiding choice of food. 
Example below compares two brands of a similar food product.  
Source: Tee et al. (2019)
Figure 14.5: Guide to use of NIP to compare nutrient content of different brands
245Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Table 14.4: Permitted nutrient content claims and the conditions to carry the claims on labels 
Component Claim Not more than
Energy Low 40 kcal (170 kJ) per 100 g (solids) or 
20 kcal (80 kJ) per 100 ml (liquids) 
Free 4 kcal per 100 g (or 100 ml) 
Fat Low 3 g per 100 g (solids) or  
1.5 g per 100 ml (liquids) 
Free 0.15 g per 100 g (or 100 ml) 
Saturated fat Low 1.5 g per 100 g (solids) or 
0.75 g per 100 ml (liquids) and 
10% of total energy of the food 
Free 0.1 g per 100 g (solids) or 
0.1 g per 100 ml (liquids) 
Cholesterol Low 0.02 g per 100 g (solids) or 
0.01 g per 100 ml (liquids) 
Free 0.005 g per 100 g (solids) or 
0.005 g per 100 ml (liquids) 
Trans fatty acids Low 1.5 g per 100 g (solids) or 
0.75 g per 100 ml (liquids) and 
10% of total energy of the food 
Free 0.1 g per 100 g (solids) or 
0.1 g per 100 ml (liquids) 
Sugars* Low 5 g per 100 g (solids) or 
2.5 g per 100 ml (liquids) 
Free 0.5 g per 100 g (solids) or 
0.5 g per 100 ml (liquids) 
Sodium Low 0.12 g per 100 g (solids) or 
0.06 g per 100 ml (liquids) 
Very low 0.04 g per 100 g (solids) or 
0.02 g per 100 ml (liquids) 
246 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Component Claim Not more than
Free 0.005 g per 100 g (solids) or 
0.005 g per 100 ml (liquids) 
Gluten Reduced 0.01 g per 100 g (solids or liquids) 
Free 0.002 g per 100 g (solids or liquids) 
The claim of “reduced gluten” is only permitted in food 
consisting of one or more ingredients from wheat, rye, 
barley, oats or their crossbred varieties, which have been 
specially processed to reduce the gluten content 
*Refer to all monosaccharides and disaccharides  
NRV = Nutrient Reference Value 
Source: MOH (1985)
Component Claim Not less than
Protein Source 10 % of NRV per 100 g (solids) or 
5 % of NRV per 100 ml (liquids) or 
5 % of NRV per 100 kcal 
High (at least 2 times the value for “source of”) 
Vitamins and minerals Source 15 % of NRV per 100 g (solids) or 
7.5 % of NRV per 100 ml (liquids) or 
5 % of NRV per 100 kcal 
High (at least 2 times the value for “source of”) 
Dietary fibre Source 3 g per 100 g (solids) or  
1.5 g per 100 ml (liquids) 
High 6 g per 100 g (solids) or 
3 g per 100 ml (liquids) 
Alpha-linolenic acid Source 0.3 g per 100 g 
High 0.6 g per 100 g 
Ganglioside Source 11 mg per 100 g 
This claim is only permitted in milk product and dairy 
products that naturally contains ganglioside 
Table 14.4: Permitted nutrient content claims and the conditions to carry the claims on labels (cont...)
247Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Table 14.5: Permitted nutrient function claims 
Component Claim Minimum Amount Required
Folic acid (i) Folic acid is essential for growth and 60 μg DFE per 100 g (solid) 
division of cells. 30 μg DFE per 100 ml (liquid) 
(ii) Folate plays a role in the formation of 20 μg DFE per 100 kcal  
red blood cells. 
(iii) Folate helps to maintain the growth and  
development of the foetus.  
 
Iron (i) Iron is a factor in red blood cell formation. 2.1 mg per 100 g (solid) 
(ii) Iron is a component of haemoglobin in 1.05 mg per 100 ml (liquid) 
red blood cell which carries oxygen to all 0.7 mg per 100 kcal 
parts of the body.  
 
Iodine Iodine is essential for the formation of thyroid 22.5 μg per 100 g (solid) 
hormone. 11.25 μg per 100 ml (liquid) 
7.5 μg per 100 kcal 
 
Calcium Calcium aids in the development of strong 150 mg per 100 g (solid) 
bones and teeth. 75 mg per 100 ml (liquid) 
50 mg per 100 kcal  
 
Magnesium Magnesium promotes calcium absorption 46.5 mg per 100 g (solid) 
and retention. 23.25 mg per 100 ml (liquid) 
15.5 mg per 100 kcal  
 
Niacin Niacin is needed for the release of energy 2.25 mg NE per 100 g (solid) 
from proteins, fats and carbohydrates. 1.125 mg NE per 100 ml (liquid) 
0.75 mg NE per 100 kcal 
  
Protein (i) Protein helps build and repair body 5 g per 100 g (solid) 
tissues. 2.5 g per 100 ml (liquid) 
(ii) Protein is essential for growth and 2.5 g per 100 kcal 
development. 
(iii) Protein provides amino acids necessary  
for protein synthesis.  
 
Vitamin A (i) Vitamin A aids in maintaining the health 120 μg RE per 100 g (solid) 
of the skin and mucous membrane. 60 μg RE per 100 ml (liquid) 
(ii) Vitamin A is essential for the functioning 40 μg RE per 100 kcal 
of the eye.  
 
Zinc Zinc is essential for growth. 1.65 mg per 100 g (solid)  
0.825 mg per 100 ml (liquid) 
0.55 mg per 100 kcal 
 
Vitamin B
1/ Vitamin B1/ thiamine is needed for the 0.18 mg per 100 g (solid) 
thiamine release of energy from carbohydrate. 0.09 mg per 100 ml (liquid) 
0.06 mg per 100 kcal 
 
Vitamin B
2/ Vitamin B2/ riboflavin is needed for release 0.18 mg per 100 g (solid) 
riboflavin of energy from proteins, fats and 0.09 mg per 100 ml (liquid) 
carbohydrates. 0.06 mg per 100 kcal 
 
248 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Component Claim Minimum Amount Required
Vitamin B12/ Vitamin B 12/ cyanocobalamin is needed for 0.36 μg per 100 g (solid) 
cyanocobalamin red blood cell production. 0.18 μg per 100 ml (liquid) 
0.12 μg per 100 kcal 
 
 
Vitamin C (i) Vitamin C enhances absorption of iron 15 mg per 100 g (solid) 
from non-meat sources. 7.5 mg per 100 ml (liquid) 
(ii) Vitamin C contributes to the absorption 5 mg per 100 kcal 
of iron from food.  
 
Vitamin D (i) Vitamin D helps the body utilise calcium 2.25 μg per 100 g (solid) 
and phosphorus. 1.125 μg per 100 ml (liquid) 
(ii) Vitamin D is necessary for the absorption 0.75 μg per 100 kcal 
and utilisation of calcium and  
phosphorus.  
 
Vitamin E Vitamin E protects the fat in body tissues 1.5 mg per 100 g (solid) 
from oxidation. 0.75 mg per 100 ml (liquid) 
0.5 mg per 100 kcal 
Note: 
• For all the above claims, words/ sentences of similar meaning can also be used. 
• The above function claims will be reviewed from time to time based on new relevant scientific evidence as well as applications from 
the food industry. Updated list of permitted claims are available on the website of the Food Safety and Quality Division of the  
Ministry of Health Malaysia, http://fsq.moh.gov.my/ 
Source: MOH (1985)
Table 14.5: Permitted nutrient function claims (cont...)
249Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Table 14.6: Permitted other function claims
Component Claim Minimum  
Amount Required Conditions
Beta glucan Beta glucan from (state the 0.75 g per serving i. Source of beta glucan 
source) helps reduce shall be from oat and 
cholesterol. barley. 
 
ii. The food to be added with 
beta glucan shall also contain 
total dietary fibre for not less 
than amount required to 
claim as “source”:  
• 3 g per 100 g (solids) 
• 1.5 g per 100 ml (liquids) 
 
iii. There shall be written on the 
label the following statement: 
• “Amount recommended 
for cholesterol lowering 
effect is 3 g per day”. 
 
Beta glucan from i. Beta glucan from barley 6.5 g per 100 g i. This claim is only 
barley soluble soluble fibre helps lower permitted in cereal and 
fibre the rise of blood glucose cereal based product. 
provided it is not  
consumed together with ii. This claim is only   
other food. permitted for product 
where the macronutrient 
ii. Beta glucan from barley profile (carbohydrate, 
soluble fibre contributes protein and fat) complies 
to the reduction of the with Recommended 
rise in blood glucose Nutrient Intake (RNI) 
provided it is not Malaysia. 
consumed together with  
other food. iii. There shall be written on
 the label the following 
statement: 
• “Before deciding to use 
this product, seek the 
advice of a health 
professional”. 
 
Beta glucan from Beta glucan from oat soluble 6.5 g per 100 g i. This claim is only  
oat soluble fibre fibre helps to lower the rise permitted in cereal and 
of blood glucose provided it cereal based product. 
is not consumed together  
with other food.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
250 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Component Claim Minimum  
Amount Required Conditions
ii. This claim is only 
permitted for product 
where the macronutrient 
profile (carbohydrates, 
proteins and fats) 
complies with the 
Recommended Nutrient 
Intake (RNI) Malaysia.  
 
iii. There shall be written on the 
label of cereal and cereal 
based product the following 
statement:  
• “Before deciding to use 
this product seek the 
advice of a health 
professional”. 
 
Beta glucan Beta glucan from yeast may 0.05 g per serving i. Beta glucan from yeast 
from yeast help to support immune shall be more than 75% 
system associated with on a dry weight basis. 
colds. 
ii. There shall be written on the 
label the following statement: 
• “Amount recommended 
for claim effect is 0.2 g 
per day”. 
 
Beta Palmitin i. Beta palmitin contributes i. > 18% C16:0 Nil 
to increase calcium content based on 
absorption. total fatty acids 
 
ii. Beta palmitin contributes ii. > 40% C16:0 in 
to increase fat absorption. sn-2 position  
based on total  
C16:0 content 
 
Bifidobacterium i. Bifidobacterium lactis 1 x 10
6 minimum These claims are only  
lactis helps to improve a viable cells per permitted in infant formula, 
beneficial intestinal gram follow-up formula, 
microflora. formulated milk powder for 
children and cereal based 
ii. Bifidobacterium lactis food for infant and children. 
helps to reduce the  
incidence of diarrhea.  
 
Calcium i. CaHMB helps to regain 1.5 g per serving This claim is only permitted in 
3-hydroxy- strength. formula dietary foods. 
3-methyl butyrate  
monohydrate ii. CaHMB supports tissue  
(CaHMB) building. 
Table 14.6: Permitted other function claims (cont...)
251Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Component Claim Minimum  
Amount Required Conditions
Galactooligo- GOS and PDX  mixture is a 0.4 g per 100ml i. Mixture containing 50% 
saccaride (GOS) prebiotic. (0.2 g per 100ml GOS (weight over weight) GOS 
and GOS and PDX  mixture is a and 0.2 g per 100ml and 50% (weight over 
polydextrose bifidogenic. PDX) weight) PDX. 
(PDX) mixture.  
ii. These claims are only 
permitted in infant formula 
and follow-up formula. 
 
Oligofructose- Oligofructose-inulin mixture 2 g per serving i. Oligofructose-inulin 
inulin mixture helps to increase calcium mixture containing shorter 
absorption and increase chain inulin (oligofructose 
bone mineral density when DP 3-9) and longer chain 
taken with calcium rich food. inulin (inulin DP ≥ 10) in a 
50:50 ratio ± 10% each. 
 
ii. Total fructant content in the 
mixture shall be more than 
90% on dry weight basis. 
 
Oligosaccharide Oligosaccharide mixture The component i. Oligosaccharide mixture 
mixture containing containing GOS and lcFOS (oligosaccharide containing 90% (weight 
galactooligo- helps to improve the gut or mixture) shall be per weight) GOS and 
saccharide (GOS) intestinal immune system 0.8 g per 100 ml. 10% (weight per weight) 
and long chain of infant. lcFOS. 
Fructooligosacc-  
haride (lcFOS) ii. This claim is only 
permitted in infant formula 
  and follow up formula. 
 
i. Oligosaccharide mixture 0.4 g per 100 ml i. Oligosaccharide mixture 
containing GOS and containing 90% (weight 
lcFOS is a prebiotic. per weight) GOS and 10% 
(weight per weight) 
ii. Oligosaccharide mixture lcFOS.   
containing GOS and  
lcFOS is a bifidogenic. ii. These claims are only 
permitted in infant formula, 
iii. Oligosaccharide mixture follow up formula and  
containing GOS and formulated milk powder for  
lcFOS helps to increase children. 
intestinal bifidobacteria.  
iii. The component  
iv. Oligosaccharide mixture (oligosaccharide mixture)  
containing GOS and shall not exceed 0.8 g per  
lcFOS helps to maintain 100 ml. 
a good intestinal  
environment.  
 
 
Table 14.6: Permitted other function claims (cont...)
252 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Component Claim Minimum  
Amount Required Conditions
Resistant dextrin Resistant dextrin or resistant 2.5 g per serving Addition and claim for 
or resistant maltodextrin is a soluble resistant dextrin or resistant 
maltodextrin dietary fibre that helps to maltodextrin are not 
regulate or promote regular permitted in infant formula. 
bowel movement.  
 
i. Resistant dextrin or 4 g per serving The minimum amount that  
resistant maltodextrin is must be present in the 
a prebiotic. food to give the claim effect is 
proposed to be 8 g per day. 
ii. Resistant dextrin or  
resistant maltodextrin is  
a bifidogenic. 
 
iii. Resistant dextrin or  
resistant maltodextrin  
helps increase intestinal  
bifidobacteria. 
 
iv. Resistant dextrin or  
resistant maltodextrin  
helps maintain a good  
intestinal environment.  
 
DHA and ARA DHA and ARA helps to A combination of This claim is only permitted in 
contribute in the visual 17 mg per 100 kcal infant formula product. 
development of infant. DHA & 34 mg per  
100 kcal of ARA  
 
D-ribose D-ribose helps to promote 3 g per serving i. This claim is only  
energy recovery during or permitted in formula 
after physical activities. dietary foods. 
 
ii. There shall be written on the 
label the following statement:  
• “Do not exceed 2 servings 
per day”. 
 
Inulin i. Inulin is a prebiotic. 1.25 g per serving This minimum level is  
ii. Inulin is a bi ﬁdogenic. specified for food other than 
iii. Inulin helps to increase infant formula. 
intestinal biﬁdobacteria  
and maintain a good 0.4 g per 100 ml on i. This minimum level is  
intestinal environment. a ready to drink specified for infant formula 
basis only. 
   
ii. The component [inulin and 
oligofructose/ 
fructooligosaccride (FOS)] 
shall not exceed 0.6 g per 
100 ml. 
Table 14.6: Permitted other function claims (cont...)
253Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Component Claim Minimum  
Amount Required Conditions
Isomaltulose i. Isomaltulose is a slowly 15 g per serving Addition and claim for 
hydrolysed to glucose isomaltulose are not 
and fructose compared permitted in infant formula. 
to sucrose. 
 
ii. Isomaltulose provides  
longer lasting energy 
compared to sucrose. 
 
iii. Isomaltulose is a slowly  
released source of  
energy compared to sucrose.  
 
High amylose HAMRS helps to improve or 2.5 g per serving Nil 
maize resistant promote intestinal function or 
starch (HAMRS) environment.  
  
Lutein Lutein as a predominant 2.5 μg per 100ml This minimum level is 
macular pigment in the (3.7 μg per 100 kcal) specified for infant formula 
retina that is able to filter only. 
blue light and helps to  
protect the eyes. 20 μg per 100ml This minimum level is 
(30 μg per100 kcal) specified for follow up  
formula only. 
 
20 μg per 100ml This minimum level is  
(20 μg per100 kcal) specified for formulated milk 
powder for children only. 
 
Oligofructose/ i. FOS is a prebiotic. 1.25 g per serving This minimum level is  
fructooligosa- specified for food other than 
ccharide (FOS) ii. FOS is a bifidogenic. infant formula. 
 
iii. FOS helps to increase 0.4 g per 100 ml on i. This minimum level is 
intestinal bifidobacteria a ready to drink specified for infant formula 
and maintain a good basis only. 
intestinal environment.  
ii. The component of inulin and 
FOS shall not exceed 0.6 g 
per 100 ml. 
 
Polydextrose i. Polydextrose is a 1.25 g per serving Nil 
bifidogenic. 
 
ii. Polydextrose helps  
increase intestinal  
bifidobacteria. 
 
iii. Polydextrose helps  
maintain a good intestinal  
microflora. 
Table 14.6: Permitted other function claims (cont...)
254 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Component Claim Minimum  
Amount Required Conditions
Soy protein Soy protein helps to reduce 5 g per serving There shall be written on the 
cholesterol. label the following statement: 
 • “Amount recommended to 
give the lowering effect on 
the blood cholesterol is 25 g 
per day”. 
 
Plant sterol or Plant sterol or plant stanol or 0.4 g per serving in i. Types of plant sterol or  
plant stanol or plant sterol ester helps a “free basis” form. plant stanol permitted:  
plant sterol ester reduce cholesterol. • “plant sterol or plant 
stanol, phytosterols or 
phytostanol, sitosterol, 
campesterol, 
stigmasterol or other 
related plant stanol”. 
 
ii. Types of plant sterol esters 
permitted:  
• “campesterol ester, 
stigmasterol ester and 
beta-sitosterol ester” 
 
iii. Amount of plant sterol or 
plant stanol or plant sterol 
ester in a “free basis” form to 
be added in food shall not 
exceed 3 g per day. 
 
iv. Statement of the total amount 
of plant sterol or plant stanol 
or plant sterol ester 
contained in the product shall 
be expressed in metric units 
per 100 g or per 100 ml or 
per package if the package 
contains only a single portion 
and per serving as quantified 
on the label. 
 
v. Only the terms “plant sterol” 
or “plant stanol” or “plant 
sterol ester” shall be used in 
stating the presence of such 
components. 
 
vi. There shall be written on the 
label the following 
statements: 
 
Table 14.6: Permitted other function claims (cont...)
255Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Component Claim Minimum  
Amount Required Conditions
• “Not recommended for 
pregnant and lactating 
women, and young 
children under the age of 
five years”; 
 
•  “Persons on       
cholesterol-lowering 
medication shall seek 
medical advice before 
consuming this product”; 
 
• “This product is 
consumed as part of a 
balanced and varied diet 
and shall include regular 
consumption of fruits and 
vegetables to help 
maintain the carotenoid 
level”; and  
 
• “With added plant sterols 
or plant stanol or plant 
sterol ester” in not less 
than 10 point lettering”.  
 
Slowly digestible A food containing slowly At least 40% of the Claim only permitted for SDS 
starch (SDS) digestible starch (SDS), available starch from starch naturally  
consumed as part of the must be present as occurring in starchy foods 
normal first meal of the day, slowly disgestible where available 
releases carbohydrates starch (SDS) carbohydrates provide at 
gradually and provides least 55 % of the total 
energy throughout the energy and where at least 
morning. 55 % of the available 
carbohydrates is available 
starch. 
Note: 
• For all the above claims, words/sentences of similar meaning can also be used. 
• The above function claims will be reviewed from time to time based on new relevant scientific evidence as well as applications from 
the food industry. Updated list of permitted claims are available on the website of the Food Safety and Quality Division of the  
Ministry of Health Malaysia, http://fsq.moh.gov.my/ 
Source: MOH (1985)
 
Table 14.6: Permitted other function claims (cont...)
256 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Table 14.7: Conditions for claims related to addition of nutrients or other food components
Permitted Claims Nutrient Conditions
“enriched”, “fortified”, Vitamins and minerals Meet minimum level for claim 
“strengthened”, “enhanced” or “high in” in Table 14.4 
any other words of similar  
meaning. Amino acids, fatty acids and To declare the amount added in 
nucleotides  a specified quantity of the food 
  
Other food components (with Meet minimum level for other 
permitted other function claims) function claims in  
Table 14.6 
 
“contain”, “added”, “with” or any Vitamins and minerals Meet minimum level for claim 
other words of similar meaning. “source of” in Table 14.4 
 
Amino acids, fatty acids and To declare the amount added in 
nucleotides and other food a specified quantity of the food 
components   
Source: MOH (1985)
257Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Focus Group Discussion on  
the Key Messages, Key 
Recommendations and How to 
Achieve of the Malaysian Dietary 
Guidelines 2020 (MDG 2020) 
(5 - 7 February 2020)
258 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Focus Group Discussion on the Key Messages, Key 
Recommendations and How to Achieve of the Malaysian Dietary 
Guidelines 2020 (MDG 2020) 
(5 - 7 February 2020)
Secretariat FGD 
Ms. Rozalina Ismail  
Senior Assistant Director 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Ms. Akmar Zuraini Daud  
Assistant Director 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
Ms. Wong Chee Yeen 
Research Officer 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
 
 
 
Moderators 
Ms. Ruhaya Salleh 
Nutrition Officer 
Institute for Public Health 
 
Dr. Ahmad Ali Zainuddin
Nutrition Officer 
Institute of Public Health MOH 
 
Mr. Azli Baharuddin 
Nutrition Officer 
Institute of Public Health MOH 
 
Dr. Suhaila Abdul Ghaffar
Nutrition Officer 
Institute of Public Health MOH 
 
Dr. Norsyamlina Che Abdul Rahim 
Nutrition Officer 
Institute of Public Health MOH 
 
Ms. Chong Siew Man 
Nutrition Officer 
Institute of Public Health MOH 
 
Mr. Mohamad Hasnan Ahmad
Nutrition Officer 
Institute of Public Health MOH 
 
Dr. Affendi Isa   
Health Education Officer 
Health Education Division, MOH 
Ms. Zanariah Zaini
Health Education Officer  
Health Education Division, MOH 
 
Ms. Norlailie Jasman 
Health Education Officer  
Institute of Health Behavioural Research 
 
Mr. Kamarul Zaman Salleh 
Health Education Officer  
Institute of Health Behavioural Research 
 
Dr. Normawati Ahmad 
Health Education Officer  
Institute of Health Behavioural Research 
 
Ms. Komathi Perialathan
Health Education Officer  
Institute of Health Behavioural Research 
 
Ms. Masitah Ahmad 
Health Education Officer  
Institute of Health Behavioural Research 
 
Ms. Siti Nur Farhana Harun 
Health Education Officer  
Institute of Health Behavioural Research 
 
 
 
 
259Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Participants  
Dr. Fariz Anwar Sajath Sajath Ahmad
Medical Officer 
State Department of Health Kedah 
 
Ms. Ho Boon Keat
Nutrition Of
ficer  
State Department of Health Kedah 
 
Ms. Faezah Abu Hasan
Dietitian  
State Department of Health Kedah 
 
Mrs. Norejan Nordin
Health Education Officer State Department of 
Health Kedah 
 
Mr. Mohd Faidzal Mohd Ashraf
Assistant Medical Officer 
State Department of Health Kedah 
 
Ms. Ng Poh Yoke
Trained Staff Nurse  
State Department of Health Kedah 
 
Ms. Norhamiza Admi
Community Staff Nurse 
State Department of Health Kedah 
 
Ms. Siti Shazwani Brahim
Medical Officer 
State Department of Health WPKL 
 
Ms. Nadrah Mohamad Hafizoo
Nutrition Officer 
State Department of Health WPKL 
 
Mrs. Nurshazliza Zakaria
Dietitian  
Hospital Putrajaya 
 
Mr. Nazrie Saini
Health Education Officer 
State Department of Health WPKL 
 
Mr. Mohd Yusman Mohd Yusof
Assistant Medical Officer 
State Department of Health WPKL 
Ms. Kerrynjit A/P Beluan Singh
Trained Staff Nurse 
State Department of Health WPKL 
 
Ms. Nor Azlina Yahaya
Community Staff Nurses 
State Department of Health WPKL 
 
Dr. Tiong Wen Ning
Medical Officer 
State Department of Health Kelantan 
 
Ms. Nurulashikin Mohd Ariffin
Nutrition Officer 
State Department of Health Kelantan 
 
Ms. Atiah Mastura Ahmad Fuad
Dietitian 
State Department of Health Kelantan 
 
Ms. Zanzalina Omar
Health Education Officer 
State Department of Health Kelantan 
 
Ms. Nur Fadhilah Mohd Yusoff
Assistant Medical Officer 
State Department of Health Kelantan 
 
Ms. Norhidayati Husin
Trained Staff Nurse 
State Department of Health Kelantan 
 
Mrs. Haja Mohaideen Myden Kather
Nutrition Officer 
State Department of Health Melaka 
 
Ms. Rafinah Muhammad Rapi 
Health Education Officer  
State Department of Health Melaka 
 
Ms. Norehan Jalil 
Trained Staff Nurse 
State Department of Health Melaka 
 
Ms. Sarina Awang
Community Staff Nurse 
State Department of Health Melaka
260 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
261Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Concensus Meeting on  
Malaysian Dietary Guidelines  
2020  
(22 - 24 July 2020)
262 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Concensus Meeting on Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020  
(22 - 24 July 2020)
Ms. Zalma Abdul Razak 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Ms. Rusidah Selamat 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Ms. Zaiton Daud 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Mr. Nazli Suhardi Ibrahim 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Ms. Fatimah Sulong 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Ms. Siti Shuhailah Shaikh Abdul Rahim 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Ms. Khairul Zarina Mohd Yusop 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Ms. Ainan Nasrina Ismail 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Ms. Siti Adibah Ab Halim 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Ms. Rozalina Ismail 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Ms. Tan Yen Nee 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Ms. Nor Hanisah Zaini 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Ms. Nur Amalina Muhamad 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Ms. Noor Faezah Abdul Jalil 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Mr. Leong Han Yin 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Ms. Aznita Izma Mohd Arif 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Ms. Nur Shafawati Mohd Ghazali 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Ms. Akmar Zuraini Daud 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Wong Chee Yen 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Mr. Noor Nashriq Jaafar 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Ms. Asranida Mat Yacob 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Ms. Noor Ilya M. Hussin 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Ms. Julia Ba'on 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
Ms. Nur Ina Fazira Mazelan 
Nutrition Division, MOH 
 
263Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Dr. Feisul Idzwan b. Mustapha 
Disease Control Division MOH 
 
Dr. Amy Nur Diyana Mohamed Nasir 
Family Health and Development Division MOH 
 
Dr. Nurulasmak Mohamed 
Dental Health Division MOH 
 
Mrs. Zawiyah bt Sharif 
Food Safety and Quality Division, MOH 
 
Dr. Normawati Bt Ahmad Pegawai 
Institute of Health Behavioural Research Chief 
 
Mrs. Ruhaya Salleh 
Institute of Public Health 
 
Mrs. Norhayati Mustafa 
Institute of Medical Research 
 
Mr. Ja’afar Mohamed Idris 
State Department of Health Selangor 
 
Mrs. Nor Azah Ahmad 
State Department of Health WPKL 
 
Mrs. Ajlaa Bt A Rasid 
State Department of Health Perlis 
 
Mrs. Rohida Saleh Hudin 
State Department of Health Kedah 
 
Mrs. Zuhaida Harun 
State Department of Health Pulau Pinang 
 
Mrs. Junidah Raib 
State Department of Health Perak 
 
Mrs. Jamilah Ahmad 
State Department of Health Melaka 
 
Mrs. Norlela Mohd Hussin 
State Department of Health Negeri Sembilan 
 
Mr. Yahya Ahmad 
State Department of Health Johor 
 
Mrs. Rafidah Yusuf 
State Department of Health Pahang 
 
Mrs. Puspawati Mohamed 
State Department of Health Kelantan 
 
Mrs. Norhaniza Rojalai 
State Department of Health Terengganu 
 
Mrs. Bong Mee Wan 
State Department of Health Sarawak 
 
Mr. Shahrulnaz Norhazli Nazri 
State Department of Health Sabah 
 
Mrs. Gui Shirley 
State Department of Health Labuan 
 
Datin Murnizar Mokhtar 
Hospital Klang 
 
Prof. Dr. Zalilah Mohd Shariff 
Universiti Putra Malaysia 
 
Assoc. Prof. Loh Suh Peng 
Universiti Putra Malaysia 
 
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Normaz Wana Ismail 
Universiti Putra Malaysia 
 
Datin Dr. Safiah Mohd Yusof 
International Medical University 
 
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Muhammad Ibrahim 
International Islamic University Malaysia 
 
Assoc. Prof. Dr Mahenderan Appukutty 
Universiti Teknologi MARA 
 
Mr. Firdaus Ahmad Fauz 
Universiti Teknologi MARA 
 
Emeritus Prof. Dr. Ismail Mohd Noor 
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
 
Prof. Dr Poh Bee Koon 
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
 
Prof. Dr. Suzana Sahar 
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
 
Prof. Dr. Ruzita Abd Talib 
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
 
264 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Nik Shanita Safii 
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
 
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Hasnah Haron 
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
 
Dr. Fadhilah Jailani 
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
 
Dr. Khor Ban Hock 
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
 
Dr. Yasmin Ooi Beng Houi 
Universiti Malaysia Sabah 
 
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Cheah Whye Lian 
Universiti Malaysia Sarawak 
 
Prof. Dr. Hamid Jan Jan Mohamed 
Universiti Sains Malaysia 
 
Prof. Dr. Winnie Chee Siew Swee 
International Medical University 
 
Prof. Dr. Norimah A Karim 
International Medical University 
 
Mrs. Musyrifah Elias 
Ministry of Youth and Sports 
 
Mr. Ahmad Zawawi Zakaria 
National Sports Institute 
 
Dr. Florence C Ginibun 
Department of Agriculture 
 
Mrs. Hafizatun bt Ramlan 
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry 
 
Mrs. Khazlita Adzim Abdol Aziz@Ismail 
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry 
 
Mrs. Juita Md Lepi 
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry 
Dr. Melia Abd Salam 
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry 
 
Mrs. Zurinawaty Mohamad 
Federal Agricultural Marketing Authority 
 
Dr. Syahida Maarof  
Food Technology Research Center MARDI 
 
Mrs. Yunida Haron 
Ministry of Domestic Trade and Consumer Affairs 
 
Mrs. Puteri Fazlieznoor Yahaya 
Ministry of Domestic Trade and Consumer Affairs 
 
Mrs. Zabidah Binti Daud 
Ministry of International Trade and Industry 
 
Dr. Teng Kim Tiu 
Malaysian Palm Oil Board 
 
Assoc. Prof. Rokiah Don 
Nutrition Society of Malaysia 
 
Dato’ Dr. Santha Kumari a/p Veluppilai 
Natkunam 
Diabetes Malaysia Diabetes Association 
 
Dr. Anni Mitin 
Federation of Malaysian Consumers 
Associations (FOMCA) 
 
Ms. Wong Mei Ching 
Federation of Malaysian Manufacturers (FMM) 
 
Mrs. Nory Heizel Mohd Fakharuddin 
Federation of Malaysian Manufacturers (FMM) 
 
Mr. Chang Kum Wah 
Federation of Livestock Farmers Associations
265Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
266 Malaysian Dietary Guidelines 2020 
http://nutrition.moh.gov.my
Nutrition Division
Level 1, Block E3, Complex E, Precinct 1, 

	
	


62590 Putrajaya, Malaysia. 
Tel: 03-8892 4503 • Fax: 03-8892 4511
 ISBN 978-967-19598-2-4
9789671959824